Crusaders of the Dark Savant:  Documentation
   Hint Book Also Available! Call 1-800-447-1230
---------------------------------------------------
Crusaders of the Dark Savant application software
Copyright (c) 1992 by D.W. Bradley and Sir-tech Software, Inc.
All Logos, printed graphic designs and printed materials
Copyright (c) 1992 by Sir-tech Software, Inc.

All rights reserved.  No part of this software or printed
material may be reproduced in any way, or transmitted, in any
fornm or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise without prior permission in writing from
the publisher, except by reviews, who may quote brief written
passages to be printed or quoted in a magazine, newspaper, radio
or television.

Wizardry (R) is a registered trademark of Sir-tech Software,
Inc.;reg'd TM Canada.  Other trademarked names are the property
of their individual owners and sue of such names without mention
of trademark status is not a challenge to their status.
--------------------------------------------------------------
Credits

Design, Writing & Programming:  D.W. Bradley
Player's Guide & Other Writing:  Brenda Garno
IBM, Macintosh and Amiga Technical Programming:  Gary Speegle
Graphic Director & Lead Artist: Chris Appel
Graphic Artists:  Suzanne Snelling, Daniel Mintor, B. J. Barrett,
Renata Dolnick
Storyboard Video Art Sequence:  Toshi Sato
Title Page Video Sequence:  Derek Hardison
Musical Score & Sound Effects:  Steve Miller
Sound Programming:  Jeff Noyle, David Triggerson
Manual Illustrations:  Chris Appel, Toshi Sato
Lost Guardia Map:  David Miller, Chris Appel, Tim Yearlington

Acknowledgments

For meritorious achievements above & beyond the call of duty:
James F. Shobert
Macintosh Special Consultant:  John Mitchell
Medieval Armarment Research:  Jeffrey Yette
Documentation Intern:  Matthew Koscak
Playtesters:  Mike Anderson, Todd Ashley, Andy Backer, James
Barisse, Les Berkman, Marty Berkman, Gary  Brockelsby, Peter De
Jager, Bill Dedi, Lawrence Ellis, Brenda Garno, Albert Halprin,
Austin Hendricks, Matthew Koscak, Jim McDonnell, Joan "MaMa"
McKeown, Zach Meston, Pumpkin Man, Jim Reagan, Monte Schultz,
James Shobert, Linda Currie, Peter Spear, Rob Welander, Dr.
Steven Yood




------------------------------------------------------------

MEMORY LANE

Celebrating the  release of  Crusaders of the Dark Savant and the
11th anniversary  of the  Wizardry series,  few computer software
products -  and only  a handful  of computer  games - can compare
themselves to  the success  and longevity of the Wizardry series.
For all this and more, we owe a debt of gratitude to you.
  It was  over 11  years ago,  in September  1981,  that  Proving
Grounds of the Mad Overlord, the first scenario,  introduced  the
gaming world  to computer  fantasy role playing and to the first-
person perspective  view.   It was a revolution to say the least.
Players felt  - and  saw -   for the first time the fantasy world
through their  characters' eye,  heading down  a hallway, kicking
open a door, or descending stairs to yet another level.  It was a
radical   and important  departure from the handful of "top down"
view and  text-based games of the day, and one which would have a
lasting effect on the industry as a whole.
  Proving Grounds  of the  Mad Overlord  also introduced computer
enthusiasts to phased (as opposed to "real-time")  combat.  While
real-time games and their passing flash tested players with their
requirements  of   arcade-like  dexterity,  the  Wizardry  series
instead sought  to challenge  the mind - allowing players time to
consider their  moves, weigh  the alternatives and prepare a plan
that will  lead them  to victory.  And,  while  a  phased  system
emphasised strategy,  it also  opened the imagination's wonder to
an adventure's potential and the intricacies of its story.
     The Wizardry  series would  go on  to  inspire  a  movie,  a
television show,  classical and  modern music and its own line of
books, both comic and drama.  The series would be translated into
Japanese, German,  Chinese, French  and Italian.   It  would move
from the  Apple Computer  to embrace  MS-DOS, Macintosh and Amiga
platforms.   The Wizardry  series has  won dozens of national and
international awards - including admittance to the hallowed halls
of Computer  Gaming World's  Hall of  Fame  - for its complexity,
rich story lines and player involvement.
  Proving Grounds  of the  Mad Overlord  set  the  precedent  for
computer role playing in 1981.  Crusaders of the Dark Savant, and
its predecessor  Bane  of  the  Cosmic  Forge,  have  raised  and
redefined those  standards -  not just  for the  series, but  for
computer  gaming   as  a  whole.    It  is  this  combination  of
experience,  technology   and,  above  all,  dedication  to  role
playing, that  has made all Wizardry games an adventure second to
none.
  And, it  is to  you that we owe our thanks - for this adventure
we have  all been  on.  Thank you for your continued devotion and
support.


INTRODUCTION FOR NEW PLAYERS

                  What is Fantasy Role Playing?

Role playing  is just  as it  sounds.    You  play  the  role  of
something or someone other than yourself.  Just like professional
actors and  actresses, you  pretend to be a character, acting and
reacting to situations as he or she would.

In fantasy  role playing  (FRP), you  also pretend to be another,
but you  do so  in a  fantasy world  of magic,  myth and medieval
customs.   In this  fantasy world,  you create characters to role
play called  Player Characters.   Just like you, these characters
have their  own individual  strengths, weaknesses,  personalities
and goals.  You guide them through this fantasy world watching as
they   encounter   enchanting   creatures,   mythical   monsters,
diabolical traps  and mesmerizing riddles.  And, of course, as in
any situation,  your actions  in the present (and even your past)
will ultimately affect your future.

Player Characters  are created  with  the  abilities  and  skills
necessary to deal with these fantasy situations.  For example, in
Crusaders of the Dark Savant, you may create an Alchemist who has
the power  to conjure spells that charm monsters.  You may create
Samurai, Fighters  and Ninja  with weapons  sturdy enough to duel
the most powerful dragons.

You create  a group,  or party, of six characters in Crusaders of
the Dark  Savant, so  that you  can achieve a delicate balance of
power that  one person,  all alone,  couldn't  possibly  develop.
You'll have  spell casters,  warriors and  thieves.   You'll have
specialists in  the ancient  arts  of  thaumaturgy,  alchemy  and
legerdemain.   And  you'll  watch  as  your  characters  grow  in
experience and  power.   More importantly,  you  will  enjoy  the
excitement of  seeing the  world through  the eyes  of an  Elf, a
Gnome, a Mook or a Faerie.

That's fantasy  role playing.   It's  a story  you  join  at  the
beginning with  your party  of characters,  write as you progress
through the  adventure and,  as you  turn the last page, savor at
the end.


                    Your Calling In Wizardry
                                
As the  soon-to-be captain  of a party of adventurers, your first
stop in Wizardry is the Character Menu.  It is here that you will
create characters  and form  a party  to lead  you  through  your
adventure.

Each of  your characters  has its own race, profession and gender
along with  a mix  of skills  and statistics  that allow  them to
perform successfully  as individuals  and as  a  team.    A  read
through "The  Player Character"  section provides  an explanation
for all a character's inner-workings.  Appendices A, B and C will
introduce you to all Wizardry's races, professions and skills.


         Creating a Party that will Survive and Succeed
                                
With the  variety Wizardry offers, it is sometimes challenging to
determine just  what races  and professions  the  "best  possible
party" contains.  Thankfully, some general guidelines do exist.

ù            A party  can consist  of up  to six members, and any
less increases the chances of disaster.  There are words for lone
heroes battling  against  incredible  odds  -  "rest  in  peace."
Developing a  well-balanced team with diverse talents is a key to
success.
ù            The first three members of a party generally deliver
most of  the damage  to and  receive a  good dosage from the more
hostile creatures  of the  Wizardry world.   Such  professions as
Fighter, Lord,  Samurai, Valkyrie  or the  choice Ninja  and Monk
fill these ranks well.
ù            A party also needs someone capable of healing wounds
and curing  the illnesses  that may befall its members.  A Priest
or an Alchemist can provide the necessary spells.
ù            A spellcaster  proficient in  damage and adventuring
spells is also a member of a successful party.  Both the Mage and
Psionic, who possess mighty and magical spells such as the deadly
Mind Flay and Asphyxiation, meet this end.
ù     To get into the many treasure chests and locked doors found
throughout  the  Wizardry  world,  a  character  skilled  in  the
thieving arts  comes in  quite handy.   Naturally, a Thief is the
perfect candidate.   However, the Ninja, Ranger and Bard can also
perform  well,   provided  you   develop  their  skulduggery  and
legerdemain skills.
ù    Lastly,  a party  should have  a diplomat,  someone who  can
communicate well  with the  many residents  of Lost Guardia.  The
Priest, Lord and Bishop have well learned this task, although any
character with  a high  enough personality  and intelligence  may
develop this skill.

There are  many combinations  of professions  that meet all these
requirements, and  below such  a sample party is listed.  For the
beginner, this  party is  not only  easy to  create, it will also
provide you with all the makings of success.

Fighter:     Able to fight monsters, and works well as a scout
Lord:            Able to  fight monsters,  and also learns Priest
spells
Samurai:     Able to fight monsters, and has the ability to learn
Mage spells (though not as quickly as the Mage)
Priest:          Heals party  members,  has  a  limited  fighting
ability, and is skilled in Diplomacy
Mage :       Empowered with  the deadly  Mage  spells,  and  also
possesses many adventuring spells
Thief:           Able to  pick locks  and learned  in the ways of
traps and other hazardous devices

One of  the most  satisfying aspects  of Wizardry  is creating  a
party  with  a  powerful  balance.    Experiment  with  different
combinations to  find what works best for you.  While this sample
party covers  all the  basics, you  may wish  to examine the more
"elite" professions.   They  often provide  a combination  of the
necessar y  attributes in  just one character.  The Ninja has all
the talents  of the  Fighter, can  pick locks like the Thief, and
with training, can cast spells like the Alchemist.


                        Saving Your Game
                                
Another saying  exists in  Wizardry for  players who fail to save
their games  when they  have  made  good  progress  or  encounter
potential danger.   This  saying is  "awwwggh!"   Each time  your
party makes some good progress, save the game.  You can gauge how
often to  save by  asking yourself  a simple  question:   "If the
power went out or if my entire party died, would I want to repeat
all that  I've done since I last saved the game?"  If your answer
is "yes,"  seek counseling.   If  your answer is "no," then save.
This way,  should your  characters meet  an unfortunate  end, you
will be able to restore the game.


                       Checking Things Out
                                
Wherever your party travels, be watchful of the ground, the walls
and the  trees above  your head.   Look  for things  out  of  the
ordinary, like  secret buttons,  and remember  clues given to you
about certain  locations.   If you  save your game often, you can
never search too much or be too curious.


                         Making Friends
                                
Take time  to talk  with the many creatures in Wizardry.  Even if
they won't  talk with  you the  first  time  you  meet,  consider
accepting their  truce and  entering  negotiations.    Successful
negotiations through  your diplomat  can bring  about a  heap  of
knowledge to  you and  your party.   You  may learn  of an item's
location or hear tale of a rumored treasure.


                      If All Seems Lost...
                                
... don't  despair.  Thankfully, there are two different ways for
you to  get help.   The Crusaders of the Dark Savant Playmaster's
Compendium  will   provide  you  complete  answers  to  the  most
challenging puzzles.   The  staff of the Wizardry Hotline is also
on hand  to answer  any gaming  questions.  Their hours and phone
number are listed inside the front cover of this manual.


Introduction for Experienced Players

                          Welcome Back!






























More importantly,  thank you  for coming  back.   Since you  last
played Bane  of the  Cosmic Forge, a lot has changed to make this
adventure, Crusaders  of the  Dark Savant.   Some of the changes,
like the new graphics and the user interface, are obvious.  Other
new features  aren't as  apparent and  are summarized below.  For
further information  on any  feature listed  here, reference  its
section of the manual.


                       Multiple Beginnings
                                
Just how  did you  end Bane  of the Cosmic Forge?  The answer you
provide to  that question will affect the whole of your adventure
in Crusaders  of the  Dark Savant.   In  total, there  were three
distinct endings  to Bane's  story.   In Dark  Savant, there  are
three beginnings  linked to  those endgames,  and  an  additional
fourth is  reserved for  those who  did not  finish Bane  or  are
starting newly created parties.


                 Changes to the Player Character
                                
Your characters  have always  been a  fascinating group,  and now
there are even more facets that go into their making.

ù            New Skills:  Diplomacy (Academia), Swimming, Mapping
and Climbing (all Physical skills) are available to and needed by
player characters on Lost Guardia.
ù            Personal Skills:   Firearms, Reflexion, Snake Speed,
Eagle Eye,  Power Strike  and Mind  Control may  be  learned  and
practiced by  individual characters.  Complete information on new
skills  and   personal  skills   may  be  found  in  Appendix  C:
Character Skills.
ù            Illness:   Your characters may also be affected by a
new illness.   Remember that unknown terrain brings about new and
interesting afflictions.   Complete  information on all illnesses
is in the Player Character section of this manual.


                Changes to Non-Player Characters
                                
Just as  your party  has its goals, knowledge and secrets, so too
do the  many Non-Player  Characters on  Lost Guardia.   When  you
first meet  a group  of NPCs,  you will likely see one or both of
the new NPC options, Truce and Lore.

TRUCE:   This option  is the pathway to negotiations between your
party's  diplomat   and  the  other  party's  leader.    Peaceful
negotiations generally  range from "I wouldn't talk to you if you
paid me"  to complete  friendship when the NPC will talk with you
freely.  Successful negotiations can also be forced and bribed.

LORE:   NPCs may  offer this  option to your party when they have
become somewhat  familiar  with  you  or  are  looking  for  some
information. Selecting  the Lore  option,  the  NPCs  may  reveal
certain information  to you,  but you  reveal your information as
well.

Since NPCs  are so  important in Crusaders of the Dark Savant, it
is highly  recommended that  you read  the NPC  section  of  this
manual.



                 Locked Doors & Treasure Chests
                                
The first  time you  come across  a locked  door or happen upon a
treasure chest,  you'll notice  something different  right  away.
Instead  of   disarming  traps   "globally,"  your   thief   will
individually deactivate each part of the trap.  For locked doors,
the thief  will also perform his surgery, methodically idling one
tumbler at a time.  On your Quick Reference Card, you will find a
"QuickStep" for  both locked doors and treasure chests.  Detailed
information can also be found in this manual.


                          Magic Spells
                                
Of course,  all the  spells you have come to know and rely on are
still with you in Crusaders of the Dark Savant.  However, now you
can pack  a few extra points for the new spells such as Crush and
Find Person  by using the extended, seventh power level.  All the
spells are listed in the Magic Spells section of this manual.


The Player Character

Your player  characters are  the essence of fantasy role playing.
Through their  eyes and  actions, you  will  discover  corridors,
creatures and  lands long  since forgotten  by all but time.  And
you will  delight in  their  achievements  as  they  uncover  the
secrets of  Lost Guardia  and advance  from novices to masters of
their trade.


                         Base Statistics
                                
Just as you have a certain level of strength and intelligence, so
too do your player characters.  Each player character is composed
of eight base statistics and eight secondary statistics.

Base statistics  generally influence the way a character acts and
reacts within  Wizardry.   An intelligence  of 17,  for  example,
would indicate an extremely smart character.  If that number were
3, the  character may  have trouble distinguishing between a door
and a fountain.

STRENGTH (STR):   Affects  any maneuver  which requires  physical
strength.   Everything from hurting an opponent to forcing a door
off its hinges requires strength.  Strength also affects carrying
capacity and stamina.

INTELLIGENCE (INT):   Affects  a character's  ability to cast and
learn spells,  determine traps  on treasure  chests and any other
task which  requires mental  mettle.  Intelligence also affects a
character's ability to learn new skills.

PIETY (PIE):   The character's overall devotion to a subject or a
field of  study, and affects the ability to develop skills and to
learn new spells.  Piety also affects the amount of spell power a
character gets  when he  or  she  gains  experience  levels,  and
further affects  how quickly spell power is recouped.  Sometimes,
in  spite  of  a  low  intelligence,  an  extremely  devoted  and
persevering character  can learn  subjects just as quickly as his
or her whip-smart friends.

VITALITY (VIT):   A character's life force, it affects the amount
of hit  points and  stamina a  character receives.  Vitality also
affects the  ability to  heal and  be resurrected,  and helps  to
protect characters from the effects of poison, disease, paralysis
and death.   Some of these maladies in turn affect vitality.  For
example, each  time your  character is cured of stoning or death,
he or she loses a point of vitality.  When a character's vitality
reaches zero, he or she cannot be resurrected at all.

DEXTERITY (DEX):  The ability to dodge a missile, pop a trap on a
treasure chest  and avoid a lance.  Overall, it is the ability to
move the  body, hands  and feet  in response  to  any  situation.
Since dexterity  is so  important to  movement,  it  is  directly
related to  the character's  natural armor  class (the ability to
dodge a  monster's hit).  In combat, dexterity affects the amount
of times a character can hit a monster within a single attack.

SPEED (SPD):   Is the length of time a character needs to perform
any given  action.   The higher  the speed,  the faster he or she
moves or  accomplishes a  task.   In combat, speed determines how
many times  a character  can  attack  a  monster  in  one  round.
Because speed  is important  to movement, like dexterity, it also
directly affects the character's natural armor class.

PERSONALITY (PER):   The  friendliness of a character, it affects
the way  he or  she interacts  with NPCs.   Characters  with high
personality  tend   to  be  extroverted  and  charismatic.    Low
personality characters  are more  introverted, laid back and shy.
A good  blend of  personalities will help your party to get along
with the  many different  creatures within  Wizardry; while  some
NPCs are  candid and  prone to  shaking hands,  others  are  more
reserved and will appreciate those with similar attitudes.

KARMA (KAR):   Affects everything your character does and acts as
a sort  of  ethical  meter.    While  its  effects  are  somewhat
mysterious, Karma  is, in  general, the  belief  that  what  goes
around comes  around (or  follows you  around).   Characters with
high karma  are generally  happy-go-lucky.   Characters with  low
karma tend  to be  less care free, through no fault of their own.
In fact, a blend of karmas is useful for a party.  NPCs with high
karmas tend  to like  characters also highly inclined. Characters
with low  karma tend to appreciate their low-karma kin, and might
even go so far as to help them.


                      Secondary Statistics
                                
Aside from a character's base statistics, many other facets weave
together to  make your  character whole.  Determining how far she
can travel before resting or how much damage he can endure before
death, your character's secondary attributes are directly related
to and affected by your character's base statistics.

HIT POINTS  (HP):  Hit points represent the amount of damage your
character can  endure before  death.  For example, let's say your
character has  10 hit  points when  in full health.  In combat, a
monster bashes  the character  and causes eight points of damage!
Your  character's  hit  points  would  now  show  2/10,  the  "2"
reflecting the  amount of  damage the  character can  now  endure
before death,  and the  "10" to remind you of the character's hit
points when  he or  she is  in  full  health.    Hit  points  are
represented by the red bar in your character's icon.

STAMINA (STM):   Stamina  is a  measurement of  your  characters'
endurance.   They can  only walk  so far or fight so much, before
they fall  flat on  their faces from exhaustion - and that's what
happens if  stamina reaches  zero.   A fully rested character can
fight harder  and hit  for more  damage than  a tired  character.
When any  character's stamina  becomes low, it's time for a rest.
Stamina is  represented by  the yellow  bar in  your  character's
icon.

EXPERIENCE POINTS  (EXP):   As your  characters slay monsters and
perform special  tasks, they  become more  experienced  in  their
trade and their art.  To reflect this experience, Wizardry awards
experience points.   As  these experience  points build  up, your
characters will gain experience levels (LVL).

LEVEL (LVL):   Learning  the ways  of  Wizardry,  your  character
becomes more  experienced.    To  reflect  this  experience,  the
character earns  experience levels  which in turn give him or her
greater powers and abilities.

RANK (RNK):   As  your character  becomes more experienced, he or
she will  earn ranks  within his  or her  profession.   The  rank
serves as  a title  of sorts, and helps to identify the character
as an outstanding member of the profession.

MONSTER KILL  STATISTIC (MKS):  For the hack-slasher, this is the
all important  statistic.   The number  you  see  represents  the
number of monsters you have sent to the Grim Reaper.

GOLD PIECES (GP): Gold is the medium of exchange for the world of
Lost Guardia and allows you to trade with NPCs, buying or selling
items, treasure or information.

THE CANDLE  OF LIFE:   The  sun sets  and the  moon  rises;  your
characters grow  a day  older.   When they  first begin Wizardry,
your characters  will be  young and full of vigor, and the candle
to the  right of  your character's  portrait will burn bright and
its wick  will be  long.   However, each occasion your characters
"Rest," they get a bit older (only by 8 hours). Eventually, their
vitality may lessen and they may, in general, start to show signs
of their  age.  Death will also affect a character's candle; when
a character  dies, he or she loses a point of vitality.  However,
since Wizardry  characters  begin  their  adventure  young,  they
typically have a long life ahead of them.

Clicking on  the Candle  of Life also shows you three additional,
secondary statistics:

ù  AGE:   Just like  you, your  characters age  as the days pass.
The number shown represents a character's age in "human" years.
ù  LIFE:   As a result of a monster's blow or a clumsy walk off a
castle's tower,  your characters  may be in need of resurrection.
The number you see reflects the life they are currently enjoying.
ù  NEXT LVL:   As  characters gain  experience points,  they also
gain levels.   This number informs you how many experience needed
until each character reaches his or her next level.

CARRYING CAPACITY  (CC):  All characters have a limited amount of
weight they  can successfully  carry  without  encumbrance.    If
characters carry  too much  weight, they are typically easier for
the monsters  to hit,  will have  trouble fighting,  and will use
lots of  stamina just  to move  their girth  around.   When  your
character is  encumbered in  such a  way, Wizardry  will let  you
know.   In the  character's review  screen you  will see Carrying
Capacity's color has changed to:

ù  light blue - 66% to 74% of the total capacity
ù  yellow - 75% to 89% of the total capacity
ù  red - 90% or more of the total capacity

Characters can  carry more  than their  CC, though it's likely to
result in exhaustion.


                        Armor Class (AC)
                                
The suit  of armor  on the  right side  of a  character's  review
screen shows  you how  well protected  he or  she  is  against  a
physical or  magical attack.   This protection is known generally
as armor class (AC).

There are  three  different  armor  classes:  Body,  Natural  and
Modifier.   Armor classes  range from a +10 (naked and vulnerable
to attack)  to a -10 (covered with enough plate mail to construct
a small  building).   The lower your character's armor class, the
better.

BODY AC:   Each  part of  a character's  body has  its own  armor
class:   head, chest,  hands, legs and feet.  These armor classes
show you  how well  a particular  body part  is protected against
penetration by  a monster's weapon once the character has already
been hit.   Even  if a  monster hits  your character,  its weapon
might not penetrate the armor on that body part.

NATURAL AC:   Shows the character's ability to avoid being hit by
a monster.   Races  such as  the Faerie,  whose  small  size  and
lightning movements make it difficult to target, have a naturally
low armor  class.  Other races who are fast and dexterous share a
similar ability.   Characters  who are  skilled in  Ninjutsu also
have a naturally low armor class.

AC MODIFIER:  Offsets the Natural AC and is consulted by Wizardry
each time your character is hit.  There are three parts to the AC
modifier.

ENCUMBRANCE PENALTY:   If your character's carrying capacity (CC)
is overloaded from hauling 40 potions, 10 shields and a pack full
of helms  around, he's  not going to move too well, and therefore
he's easier to hit.  In this case, you will see a positive number
showing an increase in AC.

SHIELD BONUS:   When characters protect themselves from a blow by
using a  shield, they are harder for monsters to hit.  Characters
who use  a shield in battle will see a negative number reflecting
a decrease in AC.

MAGICAL PENALTY/BONUS:   Some  magical items within Wizardry have
the power to lower a character's overall armor class.  Others can
raise it.  Magical modifiers cover the entire body.

Should your  character be  both encumbered  and wearing a shield,
Wizardry would  display the  average of the two.  It's a good bet
to periodically  check the  modifiers individually,  just to make
certain they aren't overloaded or otherwise encumbered.

When Wizardry needs information on your character's overall armor
class (natural  plus or  minus any  modifications), it  adds  the
number in  parentheses to  the natural  armor  class  to  get  an
overall picture  of how  well protected the character is.  In the
case of a negative number, it's subtracted.

For information  on equipping  your characters,  see  the  Player
Character Possessions section of this manual.


                            Illnesses
                                
Normally, a  character will  be "OK," suffering from no illnesses
and generally healthy.  However, your character may at some point
become less  than healthy,  and fall  prey to  one or more of the
illnesses common on Lost Guardia.

In general,  these illnesses  have three  affects:  the character
will not  perform as  well, the  character will be easier to hit,
and more  damage  will  be  done  if  the  character's  armor  is
penetrated (your  health insurance  may increase  as well).  Some
illnesses, however, have their own special side-effects.  For all
of these  illnesses, except  stoning, disease  and death, resting
may eventually  remedy the  condition.   Sometimes, in  spite  of
rest, magical intervention is useful or required.

AFRAID:   Afraid characters  will quake with fear at the sight of
monsters, making  such characters  less  capable  and  confident.
Afraid characters  may even try to run away from the party!  If a
character is scared enough, a tiny field mouse will start to look
like a huge, fire-breathing dragon with grimacing teeth.

ASLEEP:   Sleeping characters  are incredibly easy to hit because
they are  unable to  avoid being  struck.   If  hit,  a  sleeping
character will  take up  to  double  damage,  but  will  wake  up
immediately.   Of course, a sleeping character cannot participate
in combat.

BLINDNESS:   A blind  character can't  see what's going on and is
more susceptible  to a  hit because of this.  In physical combat,
it's not  likely he  or she will hit a monster without some luck,
and magicians' spells could be wildly off target.

POISONED:   As  the  poison  seeps  through  the  bloodstream,  a
character becomes  sicker and  sicker.   Eventually,  without  an
antidote or  some rest, the character will die.  Sometimes poison
is so  potent, resting  will not  cure it  quickly enough and the
character will  die before  it clears his or her system.  In such
situations, an antidote is absolutely necessary.

STONED:   Since your  character is  a statue,  he or she can't do
anything but  stand there  and collect  bird droppings.    Stoned
characters are easy to hit, but it's difficult to penetrate their
stone.   Stoning, in  fact, might  be worse  than death.   Stoned
characters lose  a point  of vitality,  and  when  cured  of  the
stoning, they  may be  dead.  When you resurrect dead characters,
they lose yet another point of vitality.

INSANITY:   An insane  character is, at least for the time being,
absolutely nuts.    For  magical  reasons,  his  brain  has  been
scrambled like  an egg missing its side order of bacon.  You will
have no  control  over  the  character,  and  may  find  yourself
protecting other members of the party from him!

DEAD:   A dead  character is exactly that - dead.  He or she must
be resurrected by magical means, and when death comes a knockin',
a point of vitality is lost.

NAUSEA:   A nauseated  character may  (ahem) choke and gag and be
helpless for  the remainder of the round.  Should this happen, he
or she will be an exceptionally easy target.

PARALYZED:   Since the character can't move, even to fight, he or
she is  very easy to hit and can take up to double damage.  There
is a  small chance, however, that the hit might just be enough to
jolt the character's system back into action.

IRRITATION:   Like that scratch you can never seem to reach, your
characters will  become preoccupied trying to quell an irritating
itch, and they won't fight as well while trying to reach it.

DISEASE:   At first,  a diseased  character will  appear and  act
healthy (you  will see  they are  diseased,  however).  In  fact,
besides general  fatigue, he or she will feel just fine. However,
as time passes, disease begins to ravage the character. Paralysis
may set  in.  He or she may become blind or incapacitated.  Their
energy and  their very  life force (vitality) may be drained from
them. If  disease is  not cured  quickly, the character will soon
erode to  nothingness. If not cured before death, you will likely
resurrect a character who will just die again.


Creating a Player Character
                                
With a  party plan  in hand,  it's time to create the adventurous
brood that  will lead you into Wizardry and across the planet  of
Lost Guardia.   From  Wizardry's main menu, select Character Menu
followed by Create.


                      Naming Your Character
                                
The first  step in  creating characters  is naming them.  You may
name your  character anything  you like,  but the  name cannot be
longer than  seven letters.   Additionally, another character may
not share  the same  name.  Once you have entered the character's
name,  select   "OK"  to  continue,  and  the  name  will  appear
underneath the character's soon-to-be-filled portrait.

On occasion,  we all  make typos.   If  you accidently named your
character something  other than  intended, just select the Rename
option.


                  Selecting a Character's Race
                                
A character's race is an all-important selection.  It affects the
professions your characters may pursue, their natural traits, and
once selected,  it's for  good.  After selecting your character's
race, you  will see  that he  or she  has been  given  a  set  of
minimum, base  statistics.   A complete  description of character
races is  in Appendix  A of this manual.  Statistics were covered
earlier in the Player Character section.


                 Selecting a Character's Gender
                                
After selecting  your character's race, you will select a male or
a female  gender.   Males tend  to be  stronger than females, but
female characters  have a higher personality and karma.  When you
choose your  character's gender,  you will  see a modification to
his or her base statistics.


               Selecting a Character's Profession
                                
With your  character's race  and gender  determined, it's time to
determine his  or her  career path.  Fourteen fields of study are
available to  your character.  You'll find each fully detailed in
Appendix B of this manual.

The professions  your character  qualifies for  are determined by
the number  of bonus  points he  or she is awarded.  Bonus points
reflect the amount of training he or she has had and are balanced
against a character's race to determine the professions available
to him  or her.   Since  each profession has minimum requirements
for entrance,  you may  or may not see every available profession
on your screen.

When you  select your character's profession, you will likely see
an increase  in some  of your character's statistics.  The points
that were  added to  the base statistics were automatically taken
from your  character's bonus  point total  to allow him or her to
meet the minimum entrance requirements for their profession.

Sometimes, even  after you  have  met  the  requirements  of  the
profession, you  may have  bonus points left over.  To distribute
your extra  bonus points, select a statistic, and add or subtract
points by  clicking on the arrows.  You can change the statistics
any way  you like,  but you  must use all of the bonus points you
have been  given.   Also, you  cannot push  a statistic below its
original value or above 18.

Keep in  mind that  it won't  do you  much good to have a muscle-
bound Mage  or a weak, but intelligent, Fighter.  Add these extra
points where they're sure to make a difference.


                      Selecting a Portrait
                                
Wizardry comes  equipped with  many different faces for all kinds
of characters.   To  view the  portraits, simply  click on either
side of  the portrait  until you  find the right one for you.  If
your character  decides to have a face lift later on, just choose
the Edit and Picture option.


       Selecting Skills & Distributing Skill Bonus Points
                                
When you  first create  a character,  his or  her skills  may  be
rather underdeveloped.   Typically, they have but a few points in
their professions'  area of  expertise.  To help you broaden your
character, skill  bonus points  may be awarded and distributed in
any of  his or  her skill  areas:  Weaponry, Physical & Academia.
Each skill is fully described in Appendix C of this manual.

Each skill  area receives  its own share of points that represent
his or  her profession's learning. To distribute your character's
skill bonus  points, just  select a  category by  clicking on it:
Weaponry, Physical  or Academia.  Then, select any skill you wish
to improve by clicking on its arrows. Remember, you cannot adjust
the points  lower than  their original  amount or allocate points
for one  skill area  in another,  and you must use all the points
you have been given.


                        Selecting Spells
                                
Depending on  your character's  profession, you  may be  able  to
select some  initial spells  for his or her spellbook.  There are
six realms of spells in Wizardry, and each offers different types
of magic  to  a  spellcaster.    To  view  the  spells  you  have
available, select each realm by clicking on it.

When you  see a  spell you  would like  to learn,  click on it as
well.   Then, select Learn, and the spell will be written to your
character's spellbook.   Sometimes  your character may learn more
than one  spell.   If so,  just repeat  the  process.    Complete
descriptions of magical spells are in the Magic Spells section of
this manual.


                          Casting Karma
                                
The last  step in  creating a  player character  seals his or her
good fortune.   When  you feel  the moment  is right,  click your
fate.   No matter  what number  you  get  when  the  roll  stops,
remember that  a low  karma isn't  necessarily "bad."   In  fact,
within Wizardry,  both high  and low karmas are needed.  You will
meet people  with both  extremes.  Since birds of a feather flock
together, having  a mix of karmas in your party will likely prove
beneficial.


                      Saving Your Character
                                
When it's  all said  and done, Wizardry will ask you if you would
like to  save your  character.   Undoubtedly, if you have created
the world's  next Hercules,  you will  select "Yes."  However, if
you have  created a fighter who can't tell the difference between
his hands and his feet, select "No."


Player Character Possessions
                                                                 
                                                                 
Gold coins  line the  pockets of  successful adventurers, and the
best of  swords, shields  and armor  adorn their bodies.  Freshly
created characters,  on the  other hand,  are light  on gold, and
have been  provided with  some elementary  armor and  weapons  by
their training  masters.  These goodies, along with hundreds more
you will  come to  possess, may be examined, equipped and used in
many ways within Crusaders of the Dark Savant.

When your characters start Crusaders of the Dark Savant, they are
carrying a few basic items.  To make these items useful, you need
to equip  and wear  them.   After all,  that nice  set of leather
armor won't do you much good while it's still in the box.


                    Equipping & Wearing Items
                                
To equip an item, click on it and drag it to the suit of armor on
your character's  review screen.   The  item's name  will  change
color to  show you  it has been equipped. Depending on the nature
of the item, several things could happen when you equip it.

ù  Items of  a protective nature will lower a character's Natural
or Modifier AC when equipped.
ù  Items  of   a  magical  nature  may  change  your  character's
statistics or  other attributes.   Wizardry  will ask  you if you
wish to "invoke" such items.
ù  Items of a functional nature, such as weapons, may be equipped
as primary or secondary.  When you select a primary weapon, it is
held in  one of the character's hands, and is the first weapon to
be used against a creature in combat.  You may select a secondary
weapon, a  shield or another item to fill the secondary spot.  If
your primary  weapon requires  two hands, you will not be allowed
to select a secondary item.
ù  Items  that   are  magically   cursed  will  "stick"  to  your
character, cannot  be removed  without a  Remove Curse spell, and
have a variety of effects on your character.
ù  Items that cannot be equipped for one reason or another (race,
gender or profession limitations) will "chime" and remain in your
character's standard inventory.


                           Using Items
                                
To use  an item,  click on  it.   Depending on  the item you have
selected, Use  may do  one of  several things.   For  example, it
you're looking  at a  potion, Use  may allow you to drink it.  If
it's a  book, on  the other  hand, Use allows you to read it.  If
the item  isn't usable  while you are reviewing your character, a
door key for example, Wizardry will chime to let you know.


                         Assaying Items
                                
With over  500 items  found in  Wizardry, you  would wear  out  a
hundred pencils  trying to  keep track  of all  their properties.
So, Wizardry tracks them for you.  To find out the features of an
item, select the item followed by Assay.


The diagram  above shows  you what  the various  sections of  the
Assay screen  mean. Depending  on your character's artifact skill
and the  general complexity  of the  item, you  may or may not be
successful in your attempt to explore all the item's intricacies.
As your  character becomes more skilled in artifacts, however, he
or she will be able to discern more and more about Lost Guardia's
items.

Regardless of  the level  of artifact  skill, Assay will not show
you the  power of  magical items,  except  potions  and  scrolls.
Assay also  will not  show you  any special  power or curses that
might be contained in the item.  Cast an Identify spell to reveal
these aspects of the item in question.


                          Merging Items
                                
Items that  can be joined or grouped are combined using the Merge
option.   Depending on  the items  you are  trying to join, Merge
will do one of several things:

ù  Grouping -  In some cases, you can carry more than one item in
an item  slot. Each item slot can hold up to 250 like items.  So,
if you receive 300 arrows, 250 would be stored in one slot and 50
would be  stored in another.  After you use up some of the arrows
in one  slot, say  you now  had 200  of the  250 arrows left, you
could merge it with the group of 50.
ù  Joining -  Other items,  such as  a rope  and a  hook, can  be
merged to form a single item.  To Merge an item, select the first
item followed  by Merge.  Then, select the item you want to merge
it with.   If  the items  can be  merged, you will possess a new,
single item.
ù  Loading Firearms  - Firearms,  such as  a musket,  need to  be
loaded before they may be fired.  By merging powder & shot with a
musket, the weapon will be ready to shoot.


                  Putting Items in the Swag Bag
                                
Each character  carries his  or her  own swag bag:  a place where
they store  things.  Whenever you review your character, you will
see his  or her  swag bag resting against the back wall of his or
her review  screen.   To "Swag"  an item,  select it and then the
swag bag.   Each bag holds 10 different items.  Grouped or merged
items such as arrows and missiles count as one item.


                         Dropping Items
                                
If you would like to drop something, select the item and then the
Drop option  to do  so.   The item  falls to  the ground  and  is
available to  anyone who  passes by.  You may prefer to sell your
unwanted items  to NPCs  or stash  them in  your swag bag in case
you might  need them  later on.   Note:   All  items, even  those
essential to your quest, can be dropped.


                Trading Items Between Characters
                                
While on  an expedition,  one of  your characters may find a neat
trinket   and wish  to give  it to  another character.  To do so,
select the  item followed by a character to trade with (left side
of the portrait for previous character and the right side for the
next character).   When you come to the character of your choice,
deposit the item in his or her inventory.
                                                                 

Other Character Menu Options


                             Review
                                
Just like  Review in  the Master Options menu, this option allows
you to inspect another character of your choice.


                             Delete
                                
Wizardry allows  you to  create up  to 16  different  characters.
However, from time to time, you may need to delete a character or
two from  the roster  to make  room for  others.  Just select the
Delete option  to do so.  Wizardry will show you the character in
question, and  will ask  you to  confirm your  choice just so you
don't send  your prize-winning  warrior packing  off to  the golf
course.
                                
                                
                             Rename
                                
If the  character you proudly named Genius is acting more like  a
dolt, you can change his or her name using this option.


                             Picture
                                
Wizardry offers  many different  portraits for the characters you
have created.   If  you decide  you would  like  to  change  your
character's looks later on, select Picture to do so.


                             Skills
                                
To review  a character's  skills, click the shield hanging on the
back wall  of his or her review screen followed by any skill area
you'd like to review.


                             Spells
                                
The altar  on the  floor of  a character's review screen contains
all the  information about his or her magical inclines.  Click on
the altar,  and you  will see  a magic  window.  You may not cast
spells until  your expedition  begins, but  you can review what's
available.   For further  information on  magic,  see  the  Magic
Spells section of the manual.


                              Exit
                                
To exit  a character's review screen, click to the right the suit
of armor - right where you see "Exit" sign.



Character Editing Options


Once you  and your party begin your adventure, other options will
be available  to your  characters.   To use  any of  the  options
below, click  on your  character's nameplate  (below his  or  her
portrait) while in his or her review screen.


                        Change Profession
                                
When your  character feels  it's time  for a  change of pace, the
Change Profession option allows him or her to switch careers mid-
life.  To see which profession the character qualifies for select
the Change  Profession option.  Keep in mind that each profession
has its  own minimum  requirements, so  you  may  not  see  every
possible choice  in your  selection (see  Appendix B:   Character
Professions  for  information  on  minimum  entry  requirements).
Select one  of the  professions you  see, or  none at  all.  When
characters change profession, several things happen:

ù  They immediately  begin  learning  the  skills  of  their  new
profession, and stop learning those of the former.
ù  They drop to experience level 1 in their profession, and their
statistics drop  to meet the minimum entrance requirements.  When
this happens,  it might appear that your dazzling Mage poured his
brain on  the floor  when he  changed profession  to  a  Fighter.
However,  that's   not  the   case.    When  characters  begin  a
profession, they aren't adept in its ways, nor are they sure what
to do.   As  they learn  the ropes,  however, they  begin to work
faster and  better and  their statistics will increase to reflect
their improvement within the profession.


                         Change Portrait
                                
To change  your character's  looks while  adventuring, select the
Picture option. Just like when you created your character, scroll
through the pictures until you find the right one.


                           Change Name
                                
To rename  your character  while adventuring,  select the  Rename
option.  You can rename your character anything you like, but the
name must  not exceed  seven letters,  and no other character can
share the same name.



Gaining Experience Levels


After a  few healthy  encounters with  monsters, your  characters
will gain  some experience  points.   When they  buiold up enough
experience points, they gain experience levels.

Gaining a  level is  a joyous  occasion.  On the screen, you will
see your  character's windown  and an announcement that he or she
has gained  a level.   Following this, you will automatically get
all the news about changes to your character.

1. The statistics may increase (they can decrease, too).
2. He or she may gain hit points and stamina.
3. His or her professional Rank may change.
4. He or  she may  get a  skill bonus to apply in areas of choice
(Weaponry, Physical,  Academia or  Personal).   remember  to  add
points  to  your  magic  user's  area  of  proficiency  (Alchemy,
Theosophy, Theology,  Thaumaturgy).   Otherwise, they  may  never
learn any new spells.
5. He or  she may  learn new  magical spells  and gain additional
magic points.

In some  cases, your characters may have survived such an amazing
encounter that they will gain more than one level at a time.


                      How Many Points Left?

To determine  how many  experience points  your  characters  need
until they  reach  the  next  level  of  experience,  review  the
character and  click on  his or  her Candle  of Life.  There, you
will see the points remaining.



Non-Player Characters


                   Welcome to the Lost Planet
                                
As your  party travels  the world of Lost Guardia, they will meet
several or  all of the creatures, known as Non-Player Characters,
who inhabit  the lands.   Some  will become their friends, others
their adversaries,  in a  continual search to uncover the unknown
whereabouts of the Astral Dominae.

Just like  your characters,  these NPCs  have  their  own  lives,
allies, foes,  thoughts, personalities, strengths and weaknesses.
And, just  like you,  NPCs have  a good  memory.  Of course, NPCs
also have  their own ambitions and goals.  NPCs control their own
movements, just as you make decisions for your characters.


                             Unpani
                                
Throughout the  galaxy, the  Umpani are considered to be fair and
reliable traders,  selling and  buying wares  acquired  in  their
extensive galactic  travels.    Their  network  of  merchants  is
monstrously huge,  and is said to comprise a large portion of the
space trade  industry.  The Umpani are also a rather militaristic
race,
 and  are considered  to have the greatest assemblage of military
power  in the galaxy.


                             T'Rang
                                
The T'Rang  are a  feared and  unscrupulous race  of  spider-like
creatures. Quite  repulsive to  the common  eye, the  T'Rang  are
strict competitors  with the  Umpani, and  will do  anything if a
buyer is  willing to pay the price. While the T'Rang can never be
fully trusted,  they still manage to control the greatest trading
network in
the galaxy,  surpassing even that of the Umpani.  The T'Rang will
stop at  nothing to  procure what  they  seek,  and  have  always
fulfilled their contracts, no matter how dirty the deed.


                              Munk
                                
The Munk are a hefty race trained well in Alchemy and the Martial
arts.   The Munk have diversified into two opposing factions: the
"good," which  seeks to preserve the holy legends of Lost Guardia
-and those  of the  "Dark Forest," who have degenerated to little
more than bands of roughnecks.  All Munk vehemently
oppose the blasphemous beliefs of the brotherhood of the Dane.


                              Dane
                                
In  contrast to the squatty Munk are the mystical druids known as
the Dane.    They are slim, almost frail looking, yet their hands
weave such  powerful spells  that they  are avoided  by  all  who
travel their  lands.   To the  Dane, the mind has always been far
more important  than the muscle, an endless frontier of magic and
mystical
insight.   All Dane  vehemently oppose the blasphemous beliefs of
the brotherhood of the Munk.


                              Gorn
                                
Well-muscled and  skilled in  the arts  of melee combat, the Gorn
army stands  as  the  greatest  native  fighting  force  on  Lost
Guardia.   The Gorn  are known to be radically loyal to their own
kind, and  while they  mix well  with the  others who live on and
have come  to Guardia,  they are  intensely secretive about their
private
 lives.  The greatest secret of the Gorn is the location of their
hidden castle.  While it is known to exist, no Gorn will speak of
it, and  even the  best trackers have failed to uncover its path.
Given the  Gorn's militaristic  abilities, perhaps it's good they
didn't. The Gorn inhabit the forest lands separating the Munk and
Dane, and  it is the Gorn army's might that has prevented the two
from turning the planet into a battlefield intent on annihilating
one another.


                             Rattkin
                                
The Rattkin  dwell throughout  Lost Guardia's  forests and towns,
rogues and  bandits  seeking  unwary  travellers  carrying  loot.
Primarily a  race of  thieves, they  eventually seek  buyers  for
their plundered  goods.   It is  rumored that  the  Rattkin  also
dabble in  forms of  espionage for  pay.   After all, there is no
race, some say, more
capable of  such an  act -  their lean  styling, great speed  and
perhaps a  decided lack  of ethics gives them the natural edge in
the business.


                            Helazoid
                                
The Helazoid  are the  most enigmatic  of the  native denizens of
Lost Guardia.     The odd flying machine that lifts them from the
ground and  allows them to soar through the sky with the birds is
a continuous  source of  speculation.   While some believe it the
work of  magic and  illusion, others  are assured it is real, and
wonder just  what alliances  may have procured them such a unique
steed.   Being sighted  only  on  rare  occasions,  there  is  no
knowledge about their origin or how many may still exist.  No one
has  ever   reported  finding   any  evidence   of   a   Helazoid
municipality.


                          Meeting NPC's
                                
Wandering through  a forest,  a creature  approaches your  party.
You have  never seen  the likes  of it before, and engaging it in
battle may  be a  bit hasty.   After  all,  it  might  have  some
information  to   offer.    The  creature  appears  reserved  and
uncertain of your ambitions as well.

When you  first encounter  an NPC,  the creature  may be  neutral
toward you  and your party, neither liking nor disliking you.  On
the  other  hand,  it  could  be  wildly  hostile  or  generously
friendly.   It relates  to your  characters individually and as a
group, greeting  some members with pleasure, others with arrogant
disdain.

Initially, the creature may allow you only three of the available
NPC options: Truce, Fight and Leave.  However, as you get to know
one another and pass through negotiations using the Truce option,
your options  and the  NPC's confidence  in you may increase.  Of
course, the opposite could be true as well.


                   Pause - Slowing Things Down
                                
When you  meet NPCs,  talk to  them or listen to their tales, you
may want  to take  notes for  future reference.   By pressing the
[SPACEBAR], the  game will  halt the dialog to allow you the time
to take  notes.  Press the [SPACEBAR] again, or click anywhere on
the screen to resume the conversation.


                     The Art of Negotiations
                                
To gain  the trust  of any  creature who isn't familiar with your
party, one or more sessions of negotiations may be necessary.  In
general, negotiations  try to  bridge the  gap between "distrust"
and "trust" that separates strangers.


                      Stepping to the Table
A silver tongue and a dashing personality, might get you on their
good side  quickly.   For lesser  skilled diplomats, negotiations
may take a little longer.

Negotiations  begin   when  a  character  skilled  in  diplomacy,
generally a  Priest, Bishop  or Lord,  accepts the truce offered,
and greets  the other  party's leader.    At  the  meeting,  your
diplomat will have four different options:


                         Up-ing the Odds
                                
BRIBE:   Before actual  negotiations begin,  Bribe puts some cold
cash into the pocket of the other party's leader in an attempt to
up the  odds of  successful negotiations.   Your  party's leader,
having had  face-to-face contact with the other party, determines
the amount  of money necessary for a hopeful bribe and removes it
from the  party's treasury.   Remember, however, sometimes it can
be very  costly to  buy friendship.  When the bribe is completed,
actual negotiations may begin (Peace or Force) or more bribes can
take place.

GIVE:   Just like  Bribe, Give  works to  increase the chances of
successful negotiations.   However, Give allows you to pass items
and other  trinkets that  you select from your party to theirs in
hopes of  winning favors.    After  the  gift  is  given,  actual
negotiations may begin (Peace or Force).


                          NEGOTIATIONS
                                
PEACE:  The straight line method of negotiations that relies on a
character's  diplomacy   and  personality  to  improve  relations
between the  party and the other group.  Peace can, of course, be
helped along by bribes, gifts and magical spells such as Charm.

FORCE:   When your  diplomat's throat is sore, and your wallet is
thin, you'll  soon realize there's only so much you can do to get
the information  you want.   The  "tell me or I'll beat it out of
you" approach  relies wholly  on your party's strength versus the
other party's.  If you succeed in getting them to speak with you,
it will generally leave a bad impression of your group with them.

Should negotiations  go well,  the NPC  may befriend  your party,
offering its  knowledge, lore  and goods.   On the other hand, it
also may walk away from you, or if angered, may attack.

Idealistically, it  would be  nice if  your party could truce and
make friends  with every  creature on  this planet.  However, the
political network  that exists  on Lost  Guardia  makes  this  an
improbable task.   If  you don't  succeed in your best efforts at
negotiations, you  may force  them to  talk to you or rely on the
words of the network of friends you've built up.



Non-Player Character Options


Aside  from   exchanges  of  information  between  you  and  Lost
Guardia's creatures,  NPCs offer  other options  that can benefit
your party in its quest.


                              Talk
                                
Allied NPCs  are generally  talkative individuals.   Some of them
may be  willing to  aid you in your quest.  Others may be looking
for information  that you  can provide.   Whatever  their motive,
Lost Guardia  is filled with such creatures who are knowledgeable
about the  area, its  lore and its creatures.  While they may not
necessarily babble  off all  of their  knowledge, they  may share
some of it provided you know what to ask.

ù Who are you?
ù What do you do?
ù Ask them about things that interest you.
ù Have you  heard any  rumors lately?   Often  the NPCs  may know
several interesting tales and you might ask for additional rumors
as well.
ù Ask about topics they mention.
ù When talking  with an  NPC, try speaking in complete sentences.
It gives  the NPC  a better  chance  of  understanding  what  the
strange aliens  in front  of it are  babbling about. If you ask a
question, end it with a question mark.

When you  select the  Talk option,  you will  be asked  to pick a
character to  talk with  the NPC.   Type  in anything you wish to
say.   "Hello" is  a good  start.   When you  have  finished  the
conversation, simply type "Goodbye" or "Bye."


                              Lore
                                
Travelling the same land as you, NPCs have learned much about it.
Likewise, your  party has  collected its  share  of  local  news,
events and  interesting tidbits  in its  travels.   When you  are
looking to  exchange such  information with NPCs, you may want to
select the Lore option.

Since an  exchange of  Lore  reveals  all  that  your  party  has
uncovered, it's  wise to  exchange this  information with  allied
NPCs. Otherwise, you may inadvertently aid an enemy.

When you  select this  option, the NPC and its group may begin to
tell you  of their  adventures and what they've learned along the
way.  They may offer you hints about an item you are desperate to
find, or  perhaps they'll  give you  directions to a place you've
never been.  Of course, they might deny knowledge of anything.


                               Use
                                
Sometimes you  may wish  to use  a scroll or a certain item while
conversing with  an NPC.   Wizardry  will ask  you  to  select  a
character followed  by the item he or she wishes to use.  You may
use items directly out of the swag bag.


                              Trade
                                
Everyone needs to make a bit of money, and NPCs are no exception.
Often, you  will find them holding some sort of mini garage sale.
You may  buy items  he or  she has collected or sell items you no
longer have a need for.  When you select Trade, Wizardry will ask
you to  choose a  character to  do the  bartering.  You will then
have four options:

BUY:   When you  opt to  buy, you  will see  a list  of the NPC's
available  items.      Each   item   along   with   its   general
characteristics and  price will  be shown.   If you see something
you like,  select it.   If  you have  enough gold,  the  deal  is
complete.   If you  are short  on cash, you may use the Pool gold
option to  get the  money you  need.   Occasionally, an NPC won't
sell your  character an  item.   For example,  if the NPC doesn't
like the  character doing  the dealing,  he may  simply refuse to
part with any of his goods.  Further, NPCs won't sell a character
an item  he or she can't use.  This way you won't waste your gold
or load  your characters  down with useless items.  Sometimes you
may be  forced to  steal an item you would like to buy:  the only
character who  can buy  the item  happens to  be the  one the NPC
can't stand.

SELL:   If you  are out to make some money, selling your unwanted
items is one of the best ways to do so.  When you select the Sell
option, you  will be  asked which  item you wish to sell.  Select
the item,  and if  the NPC is interested, a price will be quoted.
If it sounds good, accept the offer.  Of course, you can politely
decline, too.   Before you can sell an item, you must unequip it.
Like your  characters, each  NPC has  a certain amount of gold to
part with,  and he  or she  may not  be able to afford all of the
items you  are offering.   Additionally, some NPCs may decline to
buy your  items simply  because they don't care for the character
doing the dealing.

GIVE:  When you are feeling generous or sorry for an NPC, you may
be compelled to give it something.  On the other hand, if you are
facing an  NPC who thinks your party is dungeon slime, you may be
able to  convince it to look at your group favorably by giving it
a few  hard-earned gold pieces or a new, shiny shield.  Remember,
however, an  NPC will  usually keep  the object  you give,  so be
careful not  to accidently  part with  your  Turbo-Charged-Super-
Maximum-Militant-Death Sword.


                              Spell

Some spells,  such as  Charm and  Mindread, can  be  particularly
useful when  you Truce  or Talk  with an  NPC.  During the second
stage of  negotiations, for example, cast a Charm spell to up the
odds.   A Mindread  spell helps a magic user to read what's on an
NPC's mind.   To  cast a spell, select Spell, a character to cast
the spell  followed by  the spell  and its power level.  For more
information on  the spells available to you, see the Magic Spells
section of this manual.


                              Pool
                                
When you  are looking  to purchase  an expensive  item or you are
attempting to  bribe an  NPC, the  Pool option  can  be  used  to
transfer all  of the  party's gold  to one character. Select Pool
and designate a character to receive all the party's gold.


                              Steal
                                
Can't afford  that sword?    "No  problem,"  says  the  character
skilled in  Legerdemain, the art of the pickpocket.  Select Steal
and choose  a character  to do the pilfering.  The character will
attempt to  pilfer the NPC of some gold, or perhaps you might get
that sword  you wanted.  Of course, you may not get away with it,
and the  NPC will  no doubt  think less of your group or possibly
attack.


                              Fight
                                
For whatever  reason, your party decides a fight is in order, and
selects the  Fight option.   As  with regular  encounters, combat
options will  appear.  If you kill an NPC, he or she will be gone
forever, along with any clues he or she may have given you.


                              Leave
                                
Unless you  defeated the  NPC in combat, select Leave to end your
meeting.



Adventuring


The essence  of Wizardry is adventuring.  It's time to accept the
challenge and venture into the unsafe, but potentially lucrative,
world of Crusaders of the Dark Savant.

Successful adventures consist of at least eight stages:

1.               Preparing a  well-balanced  party  that  becomes
more experienced and powerful as they grow.
2.               Exploring the  world and  searching for its many
secrets.
3.               Defeating hostile  creatures who would otherwise
thwart your quest.
4.               Resting your  party from  time to time to recoup
stamina and magic power.
5.               Finding various  objects you will need to assist
you.
6.               Meeting and  learning from Non-Player Characters
(NPCs) of Lost Guardia.
7.               Making notes  about what  you see  and hear  and
using this  knowledge along  with intuition and logic to help you
complete your quest.
8.               Staying alive!

Each time you resume your expedition and are ready to begin play,
take a minute to check out your characters.  If anyone is without
full hit  points or incapacitated, a spell or a few hours of rest
might be advisable.


                         Where to Begin?
                                
Once you  have created a blend of characters that you believe can
triumph the rigors of the world, it's time to form your party and
head off  to adventure.   Depending  on your  progress, you  will
select one of the three routes below to get there.

*  Starting a  New Game  with  Level  1  Characters.    From  the
Wizardry main  menu, select  Add Party  Member.  From the list of
characters, select  six to  form a party.  Then, select Start New
Game. You  only use this option when you are beginning a new game
with new  characters that  you have  created in  Crusaders of the
Dark Savant.
*  Resuming a  Saved Game.   If  you already  have an  expedition
underway, select Load Savegame.
*  Importing Characters.   If  you have  a party from Bane of the
Cosmic Forge,  you can  import them  into Dark  Savant.  See your
Quick Reference Card for further information.


                 Ordering a Party for Adventure
                                
Since your  party walks  in a parade formation, it's important to
determine - before you meet any monsters - just what the order of
that  parade   will  be.     Essentially,  the  strong,  fighting
characters or  those with  low armor classes should be toward the
front.  Spell casters and weak or injured characters with low hit
points should  be toward the rear.  To move a character, click on
his or  her name  and select  another character  to switch places
with.

Generally, only  the first three party members will be subject to
a physical attack by the monsters.  However, some monsters may be
equipped with  ranged weapons  that allow  them to attack further
into your ranks.  Other monsters can sneak up on your lowly Mage,
who cowers  in the  sixth position, and scare the robes right off
him.  A Giant may step over some of your characters to get at the
weaklings in the rear.  Additionally, monsters may cast spells on
any or all members of your party.


                           The Terrain
                                
As you  explore  Lost  Guardia,  you  will  come  across  cities,
outposts, rivers,  streams and  forests that  are  home  to  Lost
Guardia's denizens.   You  may  also  find  a  good  many  gates,
buttons, ladders and other landmarks that lead the way (or try to
conceal the way) to these locales your party is eager to visit.


                              Gates
                                
Whenever you  come across  a gate,  you can be certain it was put
there for  a reason  - to  keep you out or something else inside.
Should you  come  across  a  gate,  and  find  your  party  at  a
standstill, try  to use  keys or items your party has come across
or search the area for possible hidden fixtures.


                             Buttons
                                
Your party  enters a  room, and  your Detect  Secret spell  is in
effect.   Its eye  starts to  blink as  you search  a wall  - and
that's when  you notice it.  The button that's so small it nearly
blends into  the rock  itself.   Whenever your party comes across
such a button, you can be certain, in most cases, that it will do
something when pressed.  Just what it will do is anybody's guess!
To press the button, simply click on it or use the Search option.


                             Levers
                                
Much like  buttons, only  more visible, levers generally activate
something or  another.   When your  party finds a lever and can't
resist the  temptation to  touch it,  click on  it or  select the
Search option.


                 Climging Up Ladders & Into Pits
                                
Leading the  way to  an upper  floor or  into the  recesses of  a
dungeon, ladders are typically a most welcomed find.  To climb up
or down a ladder, click on it.

Ambling down  a forest's  path, you  see a  gaping  hole  in  the
ground.   It's possible,  of course,  that something  or  someone
could be  down there.  Should you decide to climb into its depth,
click on  the pit  to  climb  down.    Unlike  climbing  ladders,
Climbing skill is essential as you scale the pit's sides.


                          Locked Doors
                                
Locked doors  are found  throughout the  Wizardry world.  Perhaps
the door  leads the way to a Alchemist's chamber or even a king's
cache.   Wizardry will  inform you that the door is "Locked," but
don't be disheartened.  It's possible for your characters to open
such doors.   For  complete information  on locked doors, see the
Locked Doors section of this manual.


                         Treasure Chests
                                
For gold,  swords, shields  and all  sorts of  riches, few things
compare to  a treasure chest.  Of course, finding a chest is only
the half  of it.   Creatures often place traps on chests so their
goods won't  be easily  lifted.    For  complete  information  on
disarming chests, see the Treasure Chest section of the manual.


                         Abandoned Items
                                
Your scout  spots it  almost immediately  - a  sword resting by a
tree.   One look  at its  golden hilt  and the gleam of its blade
draws your  party  toward  it.    Whenever  you  come  across  an
abandoned item that you would like to have or at least check out,
click on  the item  and select  a character  to receive the item.
The item  may be something your party or another has left behind.
On the  other hand,  it could  be a  cursed item or a booby trap.
Abandoned items  always appear in the lowest right-hand corner of
your screen.


                              Water
                                
To beat  the heat  of a  day's adventuring,  there's nothing like
wading in  one of  Lost Guardia's streams.  Of course, her oceans
and rivers are inviting, too.  Before your party sets your sights
on  a  dip,  however,  check  your  character's  swimming  skill.
Characters with  less than 10 skill will likely drown from fright
before they're even in over their heads!
                                                                 


Adventuring Options


To start  Wizardry, follow the directions on your Quick Reference
Card.  In no time, you will see Wizardry's title screen, and then
you will be at the Master Options menu.

The Master  Options menu  is the  gateway to  all Wizardry has to
offer.   It's also  the place  where all  adventures begin.  Just
click anywhere on the screen to view the options available to you
and your party.


                         Character Menu
                                
If this  is your  first stay in Crusaders of the Dark Savant, you
may need  to visit  the Character  Menu.   Here, you  can  create
characters to  lead you  through your  adventure.   The Character
Menu, along  with all  its options,  is explained  fully  in  the
Creating a Character section of this manual.


                          Add Character
                                
From the  hopeful roster of characters you have created, use this
option to  pick those  who will  join you  on your  journey  into
Wizardry.   The characters you select will form a party - a group
of up to six adventurers gathered together to explore the world.

When you select the Add Character option, you will see the names,
races and professions of all your characters.  To add a character
to the party,  select his or her name and then select  "OK."  The
member's icon  will appear  on the screen declaring him or her an
official party  member.   You can add up to five more characters.
Should you accidently select the wrong character, click Cancel or
a more desirable character instead.


Caution: Use  Add Character only if you are beginning Wizardry or
want to  start over  with a  level 1  party.   This option  loads
characters from  a roster  of level  1 characters.   If  you have
already begun Wizardry, use the Load Savegame option instead.


                          Load Savegame
                                
If your  party has  already explored some of Wizardry's world and
you have saved your game, you can resume your adventure where you
left off  using the  Load Savegame  option.  When you select this
option, Wizardry will ask you to confirm the name and location of
the save  game.   For specific  information on  loading your save
game, refer to your Quick Reference Card.


                          Review Member
                                
If you  would like  to spend  a little  time one-on-one with your
characters, select  the Review Member option; you may also select
the character's  portrait.   The character's  window will  appear
along with  all his  or  her  attributes;  these  attributes  are
explained fully  in the  Player Character  section of the manual.
When you  have finished  reviewing your character, select Exit to
return to the Master Options menu.


                         Dismiss Member
                                
To remove  a character  from your  party, use  this option.   The
character leaves the ranks and heads back to the barracks.


                         Start New Game
                                
Once your party's ranks are filled, and you are certain the party
you see before you is the one for you, it's time to head off into
the world of Wizardry.  Select Start New Game to do so.  If you
already have an expedition underway, use the Load Savegame option
instead.


                          Configuration
                                
Using this  option, you can customize Wizardry to your computer's
specifications.   You will  find complete  information  for  your
computer and setup on the Quick Reference Card.


                        Import Characters
                                
If you  have played  Bane of  the Cosmic  Forge, and have a party
eager to continue their adventure, use this option to get them on
their way.  You will find complete information on party transfers
on your Quick Reference Card.

                                                                 

It's a  curious world  full of  creatures, places  and  treasures
unlike any  you have  ever seen before.  As your party adventures
on Lost Guardia, you'll see a screen similar to the one below.

Across the  top of the main play screen, you will see six crystal
balls.   It takes  only a touch of magic to make them come alive,
reminding the  party of  a spell  in effect  or otherwise helping
them in  their adventure.  From left to right, each magic crystal
does the following:

ù            ENCHANTED BLADE:   Empowers  swords  with  an  extra
"umph" so  that it's  easier to  hit the  monsters and  penetrate
their armor.
ù            ARMORPLATE:   Provides magical  armor protection  to
the party by lowering everyone's armor class.
ù            MAGIC SCREEN:   Gives  the party extra resistance to
magical spells  by reducing the power or effectiveness of magical
spells that come the party's way.
ù          DETECT SECRET:   Magically  detects  the  presence  of
hidden items,  unseen passages  and the  like, and  "blinks" when
your party passes such mysteries.
ù          DIRECTION:   Gives the  direction (north, south, east,
west) the party is facing.
ù          LEVITATION:   Lifts the  party several  inches off the
ground and  provides protection  from falling into things such as
pits (every  little bit  helps when  you fall  on your face).  It
also  augments   a  character's   climbing  skill.    Of  course,
Levitation will not save your party if they wander off the top of
a mountain.

Each time  your magic  user casts an adventuring spell, a crystal
ball glows  with its  power.   There are  numerous spells you can
cast to  achieve this  effect, and all are described in the Magic
Spells section of this manual.

In the  center of  the Wizardry  screen, you  will see the action
window.   Absolutely everything  that happens  on, in  and around
Lost Guardia will happen within this window.


                         Character Icons
                                
To the  left and  right of the action window are your characters'
icons, complete with all of their vital statistics.

First, you  will see  your character's portrait and below it, his
or her name and profession.  To the right, Wizardry shows you the
primary and  secondary weapons  currently equipped;  a plain hand
indicates the  character is  using his  hand as  a weapon, has no
weapon at all, or is using a weapon that requires both hands.

Just beneath  each character's  weapons is  his  or  her  current
condition.   With any  luck,  your  character  will  be  OK,  and
therefore have  no condition  displayed.  However, there are many
maladies within Wizardry that can affect characters in one way or
another; each  is fully explained in the Player Character section
of  the  manual.    Should  one  of  your  characters  become  so
afflicted, the malady's icon will appear.

The most  important parts  of your character's icon are the three
bars that  indicate his  or her  general well-being.    Each  bar
represents a percentage of the total amount of health, stamina or
magic power available to the character.

ù            The left (or red) bar in your character's icon shows
your character's  current health  or hit points remaining.  If he
or she  gets hurt,  the bar will drop.  A quick healing spell can
restore your condition.
ù            The middle  (or yellow) bar reflects the character's
current stamina.  As a character becomes tired, the bar drops.  A
few hours sleep can generally fix him up.
ù            The right (or blue) bar rises and falls to show your
character's current,  overall magical  power.   As each  spell is
cast, the  bar falls.   An  evening or  two of sleep will help to
rejuvenate his  or her spell power.  A character who possesses no
magical power  will always  be at  100% -  but,  that's  100%  of
nothing.


                            Movement
                                
Across the  bottom  of  the  screen  is  Wizardry's    interface.
Whether it be a simple step forward or a quick healing spell, all
game commands are carried out through the this pentagram.

There are  three methods  of movement  in Crusaders  of the  Dark
Savant: Turn,  Sidestep and   Climb.   Two of these methods, turn
and sidestep, are available all the time and directly through the
arrows.   The third method, climb, is available only when you see
a ladder  you would  like to climb up or a pit  you would like to
climb into.

TURN:  The top three arrows represent Turn movement.  Turn allows
your party  to turn in the direction of the arrow pressed or, for
the arrow  pointing upward, advances your party one step forward.
If you  turn to  the right  or to  the left,  you occupy the same
space, but face in the corresponding direction.

SIDESTEP:   The bottom  three arrows represent Sidestep movement.
Sidestep allows your party to move over one space or backward one
space in  the direction  of the  arrow pressed.   Your party will
still be  facing in  the same direction as you were before taking
the step.   For  example, if  your party is facing North, and you
select the  left arrow,  your party  would move  one space to the
left, but still face North. Sidestep is very helpful when you are
searching long walls or dense forests for secret entrances.

CLIMB:   A ladder  or another object that can be climbed requires
Climb movement.   When  you come across a pit, for example, click
on it, and down your party goes.  Be warned, however.  Before you
go down  into pits  that are  home to  who knows  what, save your
game.


                          Party Options
                                
As you explore Lost Guardia, you will occasionally need to cast a
spell, take  a nap  or use  an item.  Within the outer circle and
two lower  corners of the Wizardry interface, you will find icons
for all these options.


                               Use
                                
Just like  Use in a character's review screen, this option allows
you to put certain items, like keys and potions, into action.  To
use an  item, select the option, and a character who has the item
you would  like to use.  Wizardry will then ask you to select the
item.  If the item you select has no particular use at that time,
then "No Effect" will be displayed.  Other items, like books, can
be used only when reviewing your character.


                            Spellbook
                                
Shortly after  your party  stumbles through  a  batch  of  thorny
roses, you might need to cast a healing spell or two.  Select the
spellbook to  do so.   Of course, you may select the spellbook to
cast any  spell -  adventuring, healing or even damage spells (if
you want to fireball a tree, but it's not recommended).  For more
information on  the spells  available and  casting of spells, see
the Magic Spells section of this manual.


                             Search
                                
You are walking down a pleasant path when you notice what appears
to be  recent excavation  - your  Ranger tells  you something  is
buried in  the ground  below.   Whenever you  feel  so  inclined,
select Search  to check  the party's immediate area:  the wall or
tree you  are facing,  the floor you are standing on and the dirt
below.

Sometimes  you   will  find  your  bounty  purely  by  intuition.
However, unless  you are a psychic (you found Elvis), a character
skilled in  scouting is  a great  help.   Magic users  also offer
assistance in  the form  of the  Detect Secret  spell.    Like  a
magical scout, Detect Secret scans the party's area and looks for
anything out  of the ordinary.  When your magic user casts Detect
Secret, one  of the  crystal balls  along the  top of your screen
will begin  to glow  with a  knowing eye.  When the eye twinkles,
search the  area right  away.   Although you  may not necessarily
find an item, a twinkle definitely means something is up.


                              Open
                                
Whenever your  characters come  across a locked door or a secured
treasure chest,  select the  Open option to get into its goodies.
Depending on  what you  are trying  to open, your characters will
have several  options.   See the  Locked Doors or Treasure Chests
section of this manual.


                              Rest
                                
After a hard day's adventuring there's nothing quite like a quiet
campfire to  soothe the  soul.   Whenever you select the Campfire
icon, your characters bed down for the night.  As they rest, they
replenish some  of their  stamina, cure their wounds, recoup some
from nasty  conditions and  replenish a  portion of their magical
power.   Each occasion  your characters  are able  to fully rest,
they receive  approximately eight  hours of  sleep along with all
its benefits.  You may wake your characters early by clicking the
mouse.

Of course,  resting isn't always a wonderfully peaceful occasion.
Occasionally, just  when your characters are getting comfortable,
a group of monsters may notice them.  Before you know it, they're
kicking up  the bed  sheets and  combat begins.    With  all  the
rustle, some  members of your party may wake up to participate in
combat.   However, other  characters, the  really sound sleepers,
may remain  asleep.   Your magician might be able to help in such
situations by casting the Watchbells spell.

Warning:  If you have a poisoned, diseased or cursed character in
your party,  try to  cure the  character before  you rest.   Some
poisons, diseases  and curses  are so  strong that they will kill
the character  before the  neutralizing effects  of sleep  have a
chance to work.

Caution: As  your party  sleeps and  dreams of  sugarplums, other
creatures may  be on the move.  If you are hot on the trail of an
important item  or lead,  you may want to stay awake.  You can do
so with  food or  Stamina,  Restfull,  Heal  Wounds  or  Healfull
spells.


                        Moving Characters
                                
Sometimes,  a  member  of  the  front  line  becomes  injured  or
incapacitated, and  you will  want to move him or her to the rear
to recuperate.   To  do so,  just select  the  character's  name.
Next, Wizardry  will ask  you to  select another character.  When
you do, the two will change places.


                          Disk Options
                                
For all  those non-fantasy  activities, select  the Disk  option.
Here, you  can  save  your  game,  change  the  configuration  of
Wizardry or perform other disk options.

ù            RESUME PLAY:   Takes  you back  to game play without
saving the game or making any other changes.
ù            CONFIGURATION:   Allows you to customize Wizardry to
your computer  and your  exact likings.  See your Quick Reference
Card for further information.
ù            SAVE GAME & RESUME:  Saves your characters' progress
to disk,  and brings  you back  to game  play.   As all  Wizardry
veterans know,  saving your  game is  an essential part of a good
gaming strategy.   Just  in case  your party dies or falls into a
deep pit, you will have your save game to rely on.  Each time you
save your  game, Wizardry will allow you to give your save game a
file name  (or to  keep the same name) and a folder or directory.
Refer to your Quick Reference Card for further information.

Warning:  When  Wizardry  saves  your  game,  it  overwrites  any
previous save  games with  the same  name. You  may want  to  use
different file  names or  different disks  to preserve older save
games.



ù            SAVE GAME  & QUIT:   Saves your characters' progress
and returns  you to  the introductory  Master Options menu.  From
there, you  can quit  the game  or select  Load Savegame to begin
play again.   Just  like the  Save option  above,  you  can  tell
Wizardry where  to save  your game  and what  to name  the  file.
Refer to  your Quick  Reference Card for further information.  If
you save  your game  to a floppy disk, it must be formatted ahead
of time.
ù            QUIT -  NOSAVE:   For those  dreaded times when your
party meets something that's just too much to handle, select this
option.   Wizardry will return you to the Master Options menu and
forget about whatever happened.

                                                                 

Locked Doors


Your thief,  or any  character skilled  in skulduggery,  pulls  a
bundle of tools from his backpack, sets them beside the door, and
begins to  shuffle the  lock's tumblers.   Across  the top of the
Pick Lock  window, you  will see these tumblers shifting, falling
into and  out of place.  Depending on the complexity of the lock,
it may have one or more tumblers.

As the  tumblers shift,  the chance  boxes below  change color to
reflect the  current position of each tumbler.  When a chance box
is green,  the tumbler  is in the proper place - press its button
to keep  it that way!  Once you have successfully calibrated each
tumbler, the  door will  open allowing your party to get into the
goods.

Occasionally, however,  you may  flip a  tumbler when it's yellow
and slightly out of whack.  In most cases, the tumbler will begin
to shift again, allowing your thief another chance.  On the other
hand, if  the tumbler  is red  and totally out of place, you will
likely fail  in your  attempt; there's  also a chance the tumbler
may jam  in the lock!  If that happens, you won't be able to pick
the lock,  and without the strength of tyrannosaurus rex, it will
be hard  to force  it open.   Of  course, magicians  can  provide
assistance if  they have learned the Knock-Knock spell, or one of
your characters may have a key to let you in.


                      Keys & Other Goodies
                                
Sometimes you  will need  a special item or a key to open a door.
If you happen across such a door, and you think you have a key or
a special item handy, select the Use option to open it.  Wizardry
will ask  you to  select the  character with the item followed by
the item itself.  If you are successful, the door will open.


                       Forcing a Door Open
                                
Stepping toward  the door,  your party  prepares to smash it from
its very hinges.  As soon as you press against the door, you will
see the combined strength of your party against that of the door.
Green (light) shows the measure of your party's strength.  As the
party  presses   against  the  door,  their  strength  grows  and
occasionally  slips  as  the  struggle  continues.    Red  (dark)
indicates the  strength of the door, its lock and the hinges that
hold it  in place.  When the party's strength exceeds that of the
door, click  Heave to  give it  that final  shove.    You're  in!
Eventually, if  your characters  strain long  enough,  they  will
slump to the floor, entirely exhausted.

Of course,  there's always  a chance that your final heave may be
less than  you expected  it to  be.  Unlike picking locks, if you
fail to force the door open, it will not jam.


                   Knock-Knockin' on the Door
                                
If you  can't seem  to find the right item, the door is jammed or
your thief  isn't doing  so well, there's still a chance that you
can open  a locked  door.   Select the  Spellbook option.   Next,
choose a character who has the Knock-Knock spell.  Cast the spell
(remember the  power of the lock on the door when you are casting
your spell),  and hopefully, if the spell power is enough, all of
the monsters' efforts to keep you out will have been in vain.

Knock-Knock also works to open jammed doors. When you cast Knock-
Knock, you  will see  either "Success" or "Failure."  If it's the
latter, try  increasing the  power level.   However,  if you  see
"Jammed," it  means you have encountered a magically jammed door,
against which  Knock-Knock is powerless.  You will need a special
item to open it - or you may never get in.



Treasure Chests


                      The Nature of a Trap
                                
Traps on  Lost Guardia  are a tricky lot.  However, through magic
or skill,  these devices can be manipulated allowing the party to
get into the chest without pesky complications.

For the  most part,  traps on  treasure chests consist of several
devices.   These devices  are rigged in such an order that, well,
when an  unsuspecting creature opens it - BLAM!  Those studied in
Skulduggery, however, can recognize the trap, how it's assembled,
and ultimately, how to disassemble it.
                                
Each symbol in the Device Window corresponds to a particular
device button.


                          Step By Step

For a  well-trained looter, the Disarm option is the gateway to a
chest's bounty.  When you select Disarm and a character to do the
pilfering, you will see
 the Disarm box below.

                                



1.           Click Inspect and hold the mouse button down.  While
you do,  your thief  looks at  the trap, checking its devices and
their arrangement.   Skill  plays a  part in  an inspection, too.
You will  see the colored box change showing a reflection of your
thief's skill:

GREEN & YELLOW:  You will do as well as your skill level allows.
RED:  You will set the trap off!

2.           With Inspect still down, look at the contents of the
device window.  It helps to write down what you see.  Here's what
the symbols mean:

   Symbol    Means
     *         Part of the trap
     -         Not part of trap
     ?         May be part of trap


3.           With information in hand, scroll through the list of
possible traps  to see  which one  is  closest  to  your  thief's
inspection  pattern.    For  example,  if  your  thief's  Inspect
revealed this:

             . .  . It  shows that  he  believed  the  first  two
devices were  attached, and that he was certain the rest were not
involved.    So,  scrolling through  the list,  look for  a  trap
pattern in  the device  window that  matches (or  at least  comes
close) . . .


             
Remember, when  you're trying to match the inspection to a trap's
pattern, play elimination.  First, rule out those that don't have
the attached  devices you  are looking for.  Then, rule out those
that have  devices you're not looking for.  Check the "?" (may or
may not be there from the inspection) last.

4.           Using the  device window  as  a  guide,  follow  the
numbers to  disarm the  trap.   For example, if the device window
shows a  "1" for  the second  device in  the top  row, press that
button first,  then the  button marked "2" and so on.  Of course,
just like  an inspection,  luck and  skill play a part.  You will
see their combination in the color box:

GREEN:       You will deactivate the device successfully.
YELLOW:      You will not deactivate the device, but won't set it
off either.
RED:         You will set the trap off!

             If your character is successful in deactivating each
of the trap's devices, the chest will no longer pose a danger and
will open.





On the other hand, if your character bungled the disarming, or if
the trap wasn't what you suspected, you may set the trap off.  If
it doesn't  blow up,  try disarming  it again or simply leave the
chest alone, though you won't get the loot.


                              Open
                                
If you suspect there is no trap on a chest, or if you are feeling
really adventurous,  you can  just yank  it open.   If there is a
trap present,  however, it  will most certainly blow up!  So, you
should always select Disarm and Inspect a chest for traps first.


                              Spell
                                
As with  many things,  magic comes  in handy when you are dealing
with a  treasure chest.   Divine  Trap, a magical mental probe of
the trap's  gizmos,    greatly  enhances  everyone's  ability  to
inspect the  trap and  to determine what's active inside.  Select
the Spellbook,  a character  with this  spell,  and  then  choose
Divine Trap  and its  power level.   After  Divine Trap  is cast,
subsequent inspections will reveal more about the trap.

Knock-Knock also allows you to get to the goodies inside a chest,
but a  bit differently  than Divine  Trap.  By magically altering
the chest's  lock and  neutralizing the  trap inside, Knock-Knock
attempts to open the chest directly.  You don't even need to know
what the trap's name is!  However, there is a percent chance that
Knock-Knock will  fail in  its attempt  to open the chest and set
off the trap in the process.


                               Use
                                
Some items  within Wizardry allow you to open a chest without the
hassle and  potential danger  of disarming  its  lock.    If  you
believe you  have such  an item,  select Use.   Next,  select the
character with the item followed by the item itself.  If the item
is successful in its attempt, the chest will open.


                       Divvying Your Loot
                                
After you have opened a treasure chest (for better or for worse),
each member  of your  party may  receive a portion of its bounty.
Select any  item you  are interested in, and character to receive
the item.   If  there is  more than  one item  in a chest, simply
repeat the  process.   Of course,  if you  want to  leave an item
behind, you  may select  "Leave" at  any time to drop the item to
the ground.



Combat


Your party  leisurely wades  at the bank of a river, resting some
from the  day's activities.   It  is shortly thereafter that your
thief screams  as he's  pulled deeper and deeper into the clouded
waters.  Welcome to combat.

Well before your party wandered to Lost Guardia, creatures of all
kinds called  this locale their home.  You will find them waiting
behind doors or see them lurking about dark recesses.  As you may
have anticipated,  a meeting between a group of monsters and your
party is  frequently without milk and cookies.  However, a combat
situation comes with fun and challenge and plenty of it.


                    Identifying Your Opponent
                                
Most of  the time,  you will  only be told what the monsters look
like, not  what they  really are.  For example, you may encounter
an "Unseen  Entity" but  you won't know whether it's a ghost or a
flying bed sheet.  Characters who have studied mythology have the
best chance of identifying the monsters' true identity.


                      The Course of Action
                                
Combat proceeds in rounds.  Each round, both you and the monsters
select a  course of  action and  Wizardry acts as the mediator of
the action.   Combat  is over  when either  side runs  away or is
totally defeated.

When you  come upon  a group  of monsters  bent on  stopping your
party in  their tracks, each of your characters will have several
options.   These options  are based  on  the  character's  class,
skills, weapons  and position  in the party.  So it's likely that
each character's  combat options  will be slightly different than
his or her fighting mates.


                     Selecting Your Opponent
                                
Sometimes, you  will encounter  only a  single group of monsters.
Other times,  you will  think you  have walked  into their family
reunion!

When you  encounter more  than one group of monsters, select your
opponents by  clicking on  their group  in the  monster  listing.
Until the  opponent runs  away or dies, the group you select will
be your  "default" target.   Of  course, you  can  always  select
another group.   Depending  on the  character's position  in your
party and  the length  of his or her weapon, some monsters may be
out of reach.


                              Fight

Swords are  drawn and shields are readied.  The Fight option pits
your characters  against the  monsters in  hand  to  hand,  armed
combat.   Their weapons, strengths and weaknesses come into play.
Of course,  skills and hundreds of other factors also play a part
in the attack.

When your  character opts  to fight  and swing  her weapon  at  a
monster, three different questions are raised:

1.     Did she hit the monster?  Her chances of hitting a monster
are generally known as "To Hit."
2.     If she  hit the  monster, did  she penetrate  its armor or
skin?   Her chances  of cutting  through these layers is known as
"To Penetrate."
3.     If she  penetrated its  armor or  skin, was  any  physical
damage done?  Known as just plain "damage," it's the bottom line.

Depending on your characters' skills and weapons, you may be able
to choose  from one  of several  methods of fighting.  The method
you choose  is called  a fighting mode.  (To see which modes your
weapons use,  Assay them.)   Each  mode has its own strengths and
weaknesses, and relies heavily on the Weaponry skill of its user.

The basic  mode is  a Swing,  a side-to-side  slicing blow.   The
chart on  the next  page compares  the other  available  fighting
modes to the Swing in three areas:

TO HIT:   The likelihood characters will hit a monster with their
weapon. For  example, if  characters  select  melee,  they  swing
wildly hoping  to hit  something.   Obviously the odds to hit are
down when  you are not really looking where your weapon is going.
Yet, a  Swing, covering  a wide arc and with direction has a good
chance of a hit.

TO PENETRATE:   The  likelihood your character will penetrate the
monster's armor  after   a  successful  hit  has  connected.  For
example, a  direct Thrust  into a  monster's leather  armor has a
better chance of penetrating it than a glancing Swing.

DAMAGE:   Once a  blow  has  successfully  hit  the  monster  and
penetrated its  armor, the  damage  column  compares  the  actual
amount of  physical damage  inflicted  upon  the  monster.    For
example, while  the odds to hit a monster are down with a "Melee"
attack, if you connect, Melee does double damage!

Damage inflicted is directly affected by character's strength.

For characters  with the  Kirijutsu skill,  any fighting mode may
deliver a critical kill.  For Monks and Ninja fighting with their
hands or  feet, the  Punch and  Kick modes  also have a chance of
delivering a critical kill.


                         Ranged Weapons
                                
With all  said and  done, the  character  is  ready  for  action.
Crusaders of the Dark Savant, acting as a game master, calculates
the character's  performance (over  one hundred  calculations are
completed), and reports damage your character has caused.

Certain weapons allow characters to fight monsters far away (long
range);  other  weapons  require  close  contact  (short  range).
Wizardry will allow you to select any monster group. However, you
will only  have the Fight option available if they are within the
range of  your weapon  (see the  chart below).  Monsters' weapons
have their own ranges, too.

Range allows         Members   to attack   Groups
Short (S)             1-3                   1-2
Extended (E)          All                   1-2
Thrown (T)            All                   1-3
Long (L)              All                   All


                  Multiple Attacks and Strikes
                                
While in the fight mode, your character may attack a monster more
than once,  and may  hit the  monster several  times in  a single
attack.

MULTIPLE ATTACKS:   After  attacking a  monster  with  a  primary
weapon (the primary attack), a character with speed or experience
and skilled  in Weaponry  may have  a  secondary  attack.    Your
character would  have two  separate attacks  in a  round!   Well-
trained warriors  can have  up to  4 attacks in a single round, 2
primary and  2 secondary.  If characters hold a two-handed weapon
or a  shield, then  they can  have, at  most, 2  primary attacks;
there's no  hand left  to hold  a secondary  weapon.   Without  a
secondary weapon, the secondary attack is forfeited.

MULTIPLE  STRIKE:    Dexterous  characters,  or  those  that  are
experienced, may  be able  to swing  more  than  once  during  an
attack.  When characters get a multiple strike, you will hear the
swing of the weapon more than once testifying to your character's
finesse.


                              Parry
                                
Parry allows  your characters to take a defensive or passive role
in combat.   But  remember, they  are still  quite involved.  The
characters may  be hit, and under certain circumstances, they may
hit back.

BLOCK:   Allows characters  to use  their shield skill to protect
against attacks.   Block  is useful  for characters whose weapons
are not  within a  monster's range.   To  select this option, the
character must  have a  shield equipped  (without a  shield, this
option will  not appear).   The  effectiveness and  success of  a
block, however,  depends on  the character's  shield  skill.    A
character who blocks cannot be hit for double damage.

DODGE:   Being extremely  watchful of  all  weapons,  spells  and
missiles and,  when the time comes, moving aside for them.  While
dodging, the character is harder to hit, and cannot be struck for
double damage.

GUARD:  Waiting for the monsters to attack, and giving them a bit
of their  own medicine  if they  do.  If a character is on guard,
and a monster does attack, he or she will jump out, regardless of
the position  in the  party, and  attack the  monster right back.
Guard is  useful for flying animals, such as bats, who can attack
anyone, or for characters who cannot normally reach the monsters.
When a  character is  on guard,  his or her armor class stays the
same.

REST:   Catching your  breath.   A resting  character will recoup
some stamina,  but he  or she  will be  much more  vulnerable  to
attack while  resting.   This option is useful if there is little
danger or  if the  character is about to pass out anyway (if your
character passes  out, it's  typically for  a while.   Rest  them
before they  collapse, and they'll definitely have enough stamina
to get through the next round.


                              Hide

Characters with  the Ninjutsu  skill can  attempt  to  hide  from
monsters during  combat.   If they  successfully hide,  they  can
remain hidden or ambush the monsters.  Since the monsters weren't
expecting an  attack, they  are easier  to hit,  and if hit, they
incur quite  a bit  of damage.  Characters may remain hidden even
after they launch a surprise attack especially if they're able to
kill an opponent before it screams to its companions.


                              Spell
                                
You are  hoping to heal a character of a pesky poison, or perhaps
you are determined to turn a ferocious giant into dust.  When you
select Spell,  you will  see your character's spellbooks.  Choose
the realm, the spell, its power level and it will be cast against
the party  you are  currently targeting.  For healing spells, you
will need to select a character.  The spell will be cast sometime
during the  round of  combat.   Remember, some spells attack only
one monster  within a  group while  others attack several groups.
Check out  the Magic  Spells section  of this  manual for further
information.


                               Use

Certain items  within Wizardry  have the  power to cast spells or
perform magical  feats in other ways.  You may use these items in
combat against your opponents or for the benefit of your party by
selecting the  Use option.  Of course, a character who decides to
use an item should have a reasonable level of skill as well.  The
Scribe skill,  for instance,  comes into play when using scrolls.
The Artifacts  skill is used for invoking the powers of magically
charged items.   The  Music skill is used by the Bard whenever he
or she plays an enchanted instrument.

When you  opt  to  use  an  item,  a  list  of  your  character's
possessions will  appear.   Select the  item  you  wish  to  use.
Depending on  your character's  Scribe, Music  or Artifact skill,
there is  also a  chance the  item's power  could fizzle  out  or
backfire on your party.


                             Breath
                                
Dracons, because  of their  genetic make  up, are able to breathe
acid upon  their opponents.   Select  this option  to invoke  the
Dracon's inborn  ability.    Breath  attacks  require  a  lot  of
stamina, so be careful not to exhaust the Dracon.


                               Run
                                
On occasion,  you may  encounter something  that's just too tough
for your  party to  handle.   When you  do, the Run option may be
your only  hope.  Your characters won't get any experience points
for the  combat, but they may come out with their lives.  Even if
one  character   selects  Run,   the  whole  party  will  follow.
Characters who  are  running  have  their  backs  turned  to  the
monsters, so  it's easier  for the  monsters to  hit them, and if
hit, characters  may take  extra damage.  Monsters may also block
your character's  escape  route,  and  the  party  will  have  to
continue combat  or attempt  another getaway.  Even if your party
escapes, there's a chance that they may run into another group of
monsters.

A good  strategy for  potential sprinters  - keep  your  fighting
characters fighting while those in the rear run.  As they do, the
fighters defend their backs, and may save you and your group lots
of potential damage.


                              Move

Occasionally, characters  may become  hurt or  fall  asleep,  and
because of  their malady,  they are  unable to  fight or  protect
themselves.   The Move  option allows  you to  put a  strong  and
healthy character  in front  of an  injured one to protect him or
her.  You may also move a strong character from the back ranks to
the front  to deliver  a deadly blow.  When characters move, they
may move to any position.  If they advance, all of the characters
behind their  new position  will retreat  one rank.  On the other
hand, if  a character retreats, everyone moves ahead by one slot.
Moving requires  extra stamina, and leaves the character prone to
monster attack.


                              Equip
                                
You have accidently equipped your prize warrior with a toothpick,
and it  is his  primary weapon.   Obviously,  you will need to do
something - equip a better weapon!  In cases such as this, select
the Equip  option.  Wizardry takes you to your character's review
screen where  you can  change equipment,  drop  equipment,  Assay
items or  take something  out of, or put something into, the Swag
Bag.   Since you  are juggling  all your equipment in the heat of
combat,  you   are  using   up  valuable  stamina  and  are  more
susceptible to attack.

Equip is  also used  by  characters  who  need  to  reload  their
firearms during combat.  Since the character must first Merge the
firearm and its ammunition, reloading firearms occupies an entire
round.

While you  are equipping,  you may  view your character's spells,
but you  may not  cast them  (use Spell instead).  Of course, you
can also  use Equip  to look over your character's statistics and
other attributes while in combat.


                         Cancel & Backup
                                
If you  are having  second thoughts  about your  selections,  the
Cancel option  allows you  to start all over again beginning with
the first  character.   Backup, on the other hand, just takes you
back to the previous character's selection.


                         Terminate Game
                                
Strolling down  a forest's  path, your  level  2  characters  are
greeted by  what appears  to be the compilation of all your worst
nightmares.   In one  round (or  maybe  it  was  one  swing,  you
couldn't be sure), he knocked out your first three characters.

At times  such as  this, the  Terminate Game  option is your only
recourse.   When you  select this  option, the game ends, and you
return to the main menu.  Wizardry forgets whatever has happened,
and allows you to pick up where you last saved your game.



Combat Modifiers


Occasionally, your  character may become afflicted by one or more
maladies.   Without  question,  these  conditions  can  affect  a
character's performance  in combat.    For  example,  a  sleeping
character can't attack monsters or defend himself - neither can a
character who  is carrying  seven suits  of plate  mail.    These
conditions are generally known as modifiers.


                            Illnesses
                                
The illnesses that inflict your characters as they travel on Lost
Guardia can  affect their  performance in combat.  Some illnesses
can also  make them  very prone  and open  to  attack.    All  of
Wizardry's maladies  and their  effects are  fully covered in the
Player Character section of the manual.


                           Encumbrance
                                
It takes  strength and  stamina to hold up a 20 pound sword.  Add
to that  200 pounds  of plate  mail, and  it'll be  a feat if the
character moves at all.  Encumbrance is what your character faces
if he  or she carries too much.  By reviewing your character, you
can see  his or her total carrying capacity along with the weight
he or  she currently  holds.   Encumbrance affects  a character's
ability to  hit a  monster and  a character's  armor class in the
following ways:

Percentage Used of  Chance         Increase in
Carrying Capacity   to Hit         Natural AC*
0% to 49% (gray)       None              None
50% to 66% (gray)
67% to 75% (lt. blue)
76% to 90% (yellow)
91% and up (red)

*      Shown in parentheses by the character's armor
       class.  "Review" the character to see its affect.


                       Statistical Bonuses
                                
Depending on  a character's  statistics, he  or she  may excel in
certain areas when compared to his or her opponent.  For example,
suppose your  intelligent Monk  is battling a dumb 'ole rat.  The
Monk, because of its high intelligence, may be able to outwit the
rat in  its every  move.   Likewise, characters who are faster or
stronger  than  their  opponents  may  be  able  to  out-move  or
overpower  them.     Your   characters'  strength,  intelligence,
dexterity and  speed as  compared to that of the monsters they're
battling, may  improve their  odds, or  lower them which somewhat
hinders their success.


                        Magical Modifiers

Thanks to  genetics, some  characters are  naturally resistant to
certain types  of spells.   As  characters progress, they develop
certain resistances  and immunities  as well.  When hit by such a
spell, the  character may  fully resist  its effects  or may take
less damage  than the  rest of the party.  To see which character
races offer such resistances, check Appendix A:  Character Races.



Magic Spells
                                                                 

Within the  Wizardry world,  there are  few who do not revere the
powers of  magic.   Some are  so taken  by its  mystery that they
devote their  lives' study  to its  ways: the Psionic, Alchemist,
Priest and Mage.


                             Realms
                                
There is  a total of 96 spells, divided into six different realms
that represent  the substance  of the  magical universe:    Fire,
Water, Air,  Earth, Mental and Divine.  Each of these realms gets
its power  from the  "element," such as fire or water, over which
it presides.   Within the Water realm, for example, you will find
a spell  to increase a character's stamina (replenishing water to
the body),  and yet another which freezes water and hurls it in a
gust at  opponents.    A  listing of  spells by  realm and  power
follows this section.


                           Spellbooks
                                
From the  six realms  of spells,  four different schools of magic
were formed, each complete with its own spellbook.

*  The  Alchemist  sought  to  use  the  natural  powers  of  the
elements, and  learned to mix them together for their healing and
combat use.  Alchemists spells cannot be silenced.  The Ninja and
Ranger also practice this form of magic.
*  The Priest  gathered the  elemental powers  of the divine, and
developed spells  to heal  his fellow  man and  protect him  from
enemies.   The Bishop,  Lord and Valkyrie also practice this form
of magic.
*  The Mage  channeled the  elemental forces  for their wrath and
collected an  assemblage of  spells which brought the fury of the
elements upon  his opponents.   The Samurai, Bard and Bishop also
practice this form of magic.
*  The Psionic  fathomed the  powers of  the mind, and learned to
use its  wonder for  both healing and damaging means.  The devout
Monk also practices this mental art.

An  individual  listing  of  each  spellbook  follows  the  realm
listing. Each spellbook has been alphabetized for easy lookup and
use.


                      Learning Spell Levels

Each realm  is broken down into seven spell levels (level 1 Earth
spells, level  2 Earth  spells and  so on).   Your  spell casters
typically learn one level at a time, but may occasionally learn a
level 2  spell before  learning all  of level  1.   Generally,  a
spell's  level  represents  its  complexity,  overall  power  and
difficulty to  cast.   The more skilled your magic user in his or
her area  of interest,  the higher  the level  of spells they can
learn.


                      Casting Power Levels
                                
Each spell  has seven  different power  levels that are used when
casting the  spell.   In general, the higher the power level, the
more powerful  the spell  and the  more skill required to cast it
(Oratory).   For damage-oriented  and healing  spells, the  power
level will  affect the  amount of  damage or  healing done.   For
other spells,  such as  Knock-Knock or Direction, the power level
of the spell will increase its effectiveness or duration.


                        Spell Power Costs
                                
For each  spell your  character learns, he or she will be given a
certain amount  of spell points.  These points, in turn, are used
to cast  the spells.   When  your magic user casts a spell, he or
she must have enough spell points available to fire it off.  As a
spell increases  in power, it also increases in cost and requires
more Oratory  to intone.   For  example, if a spell cost 5 points
for power level 1, then it would cost 10 points for power level 2
and so on.


                        Affects & Effects
                                
Some spells  attack only  one monster or help only one character.
Others can  encompass all  opponents or  affect the entire party.
In the  list of  spells which  follows, the  affected  person  or
group(s) are  listed.   Some monsters may not be affected or only
partially affected  by a spell.  If it's an "all-or-nothing" type
spell, there  may be  no effect  at all.   Lastly, just like your
characters, some  creatures are  resistant to  certain  types  of
spells.   For example, an Ice Giant probably wouldn't be affected
by an Iceball spell (unless the laughing did him in).


                        Summoning Spells
                                
Your lead  fighter has  two hit points left, your mage has fallen
asleep, and  your priest is too insane to do much about it.  With
the last  bit of  power he  can muster, your Psionic fires off an
Illusion spell.   And  . .  . voila, a Greater Demon appears - at
your service!   With  a flick  of his  giant,  fiery  hand,  your
enemies are but a bad memory.

For just such reasons, summoning spells are a favorite among Lost
Guardia's magic  users.   These spells  allow  you  to  summon  a
monster from  another plane  to fight  for your  party.  Once you
have summoned  one group of monsters, however, you may not summon
another group until the first group dies or the encounter ends.

Summoned  monsters   can  be  extremely  useful  to  your  party.
Sometimes an  attack originally  meant for  your characters  will
strike the  summoned group of monsters . . . saving you the pain,
rest and healing spells necessary to recover.


                             Oratory
                                
One of  the most important skills of the spell caster, Oratory is
the practice  of successfully  reciting a  spell while  under the
duress of  combat.   A character  proficient in oratory should be
able to  zip off  a deadly  spell while  simultaneously dodging a
sword's blow.

However, characters with poor oratory or bad luck may backfire or
fumble a  spell.   When a  spell backfires,  it attacks the party
instead of  the monsters!   So,  if you  cast a Magic Missile and
fumble its  incantation .  . .  b o o m.  Your characters will be
affected just as if the monsters had cast it on you.


                         Casting A Spell
                                
There are  six steps  to casting  a spell.   As you complete each
part, you  will see  the cursor  blinking at  you to indicate the
next course of action.

1. Select the "Spellbook" option   5.        Select Cast
2. Choose a realm     6. Give the spell a target (a
3. Select a spell        character, a monster, a
4. Set the power level        group, an item,  etc.)

Your spell  casters must  study to  learn more spells.  When your
spell casters  gain a level, be sure to add skill points to their
area of proficiency.  Some classes, such as the Samurai, are both
warriors and  spell casters.   Be  careful not  to neglect  their
fighting skills in lieu of spell power.

Fire Spells


Energy BlastCost: 2
Caster: MAG
Affects: 1 Creature
A jolting  spark of electric energy doing 1-7 hit point of damage
per power level.

Blinding FlashCost: 2
Caster: ALC
Affects: 1 Creature plus power level
A giant flash of light that may temporarily blind opponents.

Psionic FireCost: 4
Caster: PSI      
Affects: 2 Creatures plus power level
A fiery burst of mental power doing 1-8 points of fire damage per
power level.

Fireball  Cost: 6
Caster: MAG
Affects: 3 Creatures plus power level
Blazing fireballs  that burn opponents and can do 2-10 hit points
of fire damage per power level.

Fire ShieldCost: 8
Caster: MAG
Affects: Party
Creates a barrier impervious to fire that protects the party from
fire-type spells.

Dazzling Lights Cost: 6
Caster: PSI         
Affects: 1 Creature plus power level
A spectacular display of various luminous effects causing victims
to suffer one or more maladies.

Fire Bomb Cost: 8
Caster: ALC
Affects: 4 Creatures plus power level
An exploding,  incendiary spell  that does  3-9  points  of  fire
damage per power level.

Lightning Cost: 8
Caster: PRI
Affects: 3 Creatures plus power level
A bolt  of electrical  energy hurled  at the opponents doing 1-10
hit points of electrical damage per power level.

Prismic MissileCost: 9
Caster: MAG         
Affects: 3 Creatures plus power level
Also known  as Dancing  Lights  and  Rainbow  Rays,  the  various
spectrums may affect creatures in many different ways.

Firestorm Cost: 12
Caster: MAG
Affects: Cloud
A sweeping cloud of fire that lasts for several rounds and burns
all creatures within it.  Creatures affected, duration and damage
done all depend on the spell's power level.

Nuclear BlastCost: 16
Caster: MAG
Affects: All Creatures
A miniature fusion bomb.  This spell burns all creatures and does
5-25 hit points of fire damage per power level.

Water Spells


Chilling Touch   
Cost: 2
Caster: MAG
Affects: 1 Creature
A freezing blast of cold which does 1-6 hit points of cold damage
per power level.

Stamina
Cost: 2
Caster: PRI, ALC, PSI    
Affects: 1 Character
Replenishes some of the character's stamina keeping the character
awake or  allowing him  or her  to go  without sleep for a longer
period of  time.   Amount of  stamina replenished  depends on the
power level of the spell.

Terror
Cost: 3
Caster: MAG, PSI    
Affects: 1 Group
Evokes fear  and terror in creatures and may reduce their ability
to fight or cause them to flee.

Weaken
Cost: 4
Caster: MAG, PSI 
Affects: 3 Creatures plus power level
Physically drains the creatures making them vulnerable to attack,
causing them  to fight  and  react  poorly,  and  lowering  their
resistance to magic spells.

Slow
Cost 4
Caster: PRI, PSI
Affects: 3 Creatures plus power level
Slows creatures down.  They can't move as fast to hit you and are
easier to hit themselves.

Haste
Cost: 5
Caster PRI, PSI
Affects: Party
Speeds up  characters' movements  by giving  them  extra  energy.
Also helpful to counteract a Slow spell.

Cure Paralysis   
Cost: 6
Caster: PRI, ALC, PSI
Affects: 1 Character
Attempts to  cure one character of paralysis.  Success depends on
the extent  of paralysis  to the  character's system  versus  the
power level of the spell.

Ice Shield
Cost: 8
Caster: MAG              
Affects: Party
A barricade  which resists  the affects  of cold and protects the
party from  cold and  cold-type spells.  Strength and duration of
the Ice Shield depends on the power level of the spell.
                                                                 
Restfull
Cost: 8
Caster: PRI
Affects: Party
A gentle spell that restores a portion of stamina to every member
of the party.  Stamina recouped is relative to the power level of
the spell.

Iceball          
Cost: 8
Caster: MAG
Affects: 4 Creatures plus power level   
A flurry of stinging ice balls which cause 3-12 hit points of ice
damage per power level.
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                                 
Water Spells


Paralyze
Cost: 5
Caster: PRI, PSI
Affects: 1 Creature           
Attempts to  solidify all  water in a creature's body.   Duration
and success  depends on  the power level of the spell relative to
the power and amount of body water in the creature.

Superman
Cost: 7
Caster: PRI
Affects: 1 Character
Empowers a  party member  with a  heroic boost of energy allowing
him or her to fight with the power and finesse of a hero.

Deepfreeze
Cost: 6
Caster: MAG
Affects: 1 Creature           
Attempts to  freeze a  creature's bodily  fluids solid doing 3-30
hit points of severe ice damage per power level.

Draining Cloud   
Cost: 8
Caster: ALC
Affects: Cloud
Surrounds creatures  in a  mystical cloud  that attempts to drain
their  lifeforce  every  round  they  remain  inside  the  cloud.
Duration and power of the cloud are relative to the spell's power
level.

Cure Disease
Cost: 12
Caster: PRI, ALC
Affects: 1 Character
Attempts to  cure someone  of disease  and its  effects.  Success
depends on  the strength  of the disease relative to the  spell's
strength.



Air Spells


Poison           
Cost: 2
Caster: ALC
Affects: 1 Creature
Turns the  air poisonous  around the creature, and causes 1-5 hit
points damage  per power  level plus  poisoning.  Strength of the
poison is relative to the power level of the spell.

Missile Shield
Cost: 5
Caster: MAG      
Affects: Party
Hardens the  air around  the party forming a shield that protects
characters from missiles, arrows, hurled weapons, etc.

Shrill Sound
Cost: 4
Caster: MAG, PSI
Affects: 1 Group
Whips the air creating a high frequency pressure wave that blasts
the creatures with 1-5  damage per power level.

Stink Bomb       
Cost: 8
Caster: MAG, ALC
Affects: 3 Creatures
An odorous  cloud of stinking fumes that can cause 1-6 hit points
damage per power level and may make them nauseated.

Air Pocket       
Cost: 8
Caster: MAG, ALC
Affects: Party
Protects the  party from  air spells  such as stinking clouds and
suffocation by  creating a  pocket of fresh air around the party.
Strength and  duration of  the pocket  are relative  to the power
level of the spell.

Silence
Cost: 4
Caster: PRI, PSI    
Affects: 3 Creatures plus power level
Causes air  around creatures  to stop  transmitting  sound,  thus
preventing them  from casting  spells.    Strength  and  duration
relative to the power level of the spell.

Poison Gas       
Cost: 7
Caster: ALC              
Affects: Cloud
Poisonous cloud  that lasts  several  rounds  and  surrounds  the
creatures in  the gas.   Creatures  inside the  cloud suffer from
poisoning and  damage.   The  creatures  affected,  duration  and
damage done all depend on the power level of the spell.

Cure Poison      
Cost: 8
Caster: PRI, ALC    
Affects: 1 Character
Attempts to  cure one character of poisoning.  Success depends on
the strength of the poison relative to the strength of the spell.

Whirlwind        
Cost: 8
Caster: PRI
Affects: 3 Creatures plus power level
A swirling  tornado whipping  around the  creatures and  blasting
them with 1-7 hit points damage per power level.

Purify Air
Cost: 10
Caster: PRI, ALC
Affects: Party
Tries to  clear the  air of  any dangerous clouds like Poison Gas
and Firestorm.  Success depends on the amount and strength of the
clouds relative to the spell's strength.

Deadly Poison
Cost: 8
Caster: ALC
Affects: 1 Creature                                              
May kill  a creature  outright or  does extremely heavy poisoning
plus 3-15 damage points per power level.

Levitate         
Cost: 12
Caster: MAG
Affects: Party
Creates a  3-inch cushion  of air  underneath  party  helping  to
prevent or reduce damage in case they fall. Duration of the spell
is relative to the power level of the spell.

Toxic Vapors
Cost: 8
Caster: ALC
Affects: Cloud
A giant,  stinking cloud  of vapors  that surrounds the creatures
and causes 2-6 hit points damage per power level of the spell.

Noxious Fumes   
Cost 10
Caster: MAG, ALC
Affects: 3 Creatures plus power level   
Horrid smelling  torrents that  blast the  creatures'  noses  and
cause 1-6 hit points damage per power level plus nausea.

Asphyxiation
Cost: 12
Caster: MAG, ALC
Affects: All Groups                                              
Swallows air around creatures leaving none to breathe.  Chance of
creatures' death  depends on  their ability  and need to breathe,
strength and  susceptibility relative  to  the  strength  of  the
spell.

Deadly Air       
Cost: 16
Caster: ALC
Affects: All Creatures
Makes air  surrounding the  creatures entirely  unbreathable  and
causes 4-16 hit points damage per power level.

Death Cloud      
Cost: 20
Caster: ALC
Affects: Cloud
Black vapors that engulf a group of creatures and attempt to kill
them outright.   Every round creatures remain in the cloud, there
is a chance they will die.



Earth Spells



Acid Splash
Cost: 2
Caster: ALC
Affects: 1 Creature
A rushing  wave of  bubbling acid  that causes  1-7 hit points of
damage per power level.

Itching Skin
Cost: 2
Caster: ALC
Affects: 2 Creatures plus power level
A sprinkle of powder that causes the creatures' skin to itch.  It
also irritates  the creatures and lessens their ability to attack
and defend.

Armor Shield
Cost: 2
Caster: MAG         
Affects: 1 Person
Creates a  magical shield in front of the person, lowering his or
her armor class by one point per power level.

Direction
Cost: 2
Caster: MAG
Affects: Party
A magical  compass that  shows the  direction the party is facing
(N, S,  E or  W).   The duration  of the spell is relative to the
power level.

Knock-Knock      
Cost: 6
Caster: MAG, PSI
Affects: Locked Doors and Treasure Chests
Magically alters the lock on a door (jammed or not) or a chest in
an attempt  to unlock  it.   When used  on a  chest, there  is  a
percent chance that it may set the trap off.

Blades           
Cost: 6
Caster: PRI, PSI    
Affects: 3 Creatures plus power level
Hurls slicing  razor blades  through the air doing 2-8 hit points
damage per power level without providing a nice, clean shave.

Armorplate       
Cost: 6
Caster: PRI
Affects: Party
Creates a  magic armor  plating around the party, protecting them
and lowering  their armor  class. Duration and strength depend on
power level.

Web
Cost: 7
Caster: MAG, PRI 
Affects: 1 Creature
Attempts to capture 1 creature in a sticky web slowing or halting
its movements or attacks.  Success depends on the strength of the
creature relative to the power level of the spell.

Whipping Rocks
Cost: 7
Caster: MAG, ALC
Affects:  1 Group
A vortex  of rocks  sailing toward a group of creatures doing 1-6
damage per power level.

Acid Bomb        
Cost: 8
Caster: ALC
Affects: Cloud
A giant  acid cloud  that surrounds  creatures  and  causes  acid
damage.   The creatures  affected, duration  and damage  done all
depend on the power level of the spell.

Armormelt
Cost: 8
Caster: MAG, PSI
Affects:  1 Group
Softens the  armor of creatures thus raising their armor class in
proportion to  the power  level of the spell making it easier for
your weapons to penetrate their armor.

Crush            
Cost: 9
Caster: MAG, ALC
Affects: 1 Creature
Creates a  gigantic stone that attempts to crush a creature doing
up to 200 points of damage! Ouch!

Create Life
Cost: 10
Caster: ALC
Affects: Party
Summons a  group of  organic creatures  to come and fight for the
party.  The power and number of creatures summoned is relative to
the power level of the spell.

Cure Stone       
Cost: 18
Caster: PRI, ALC 
Affects: 1 Character
Attempts to  restore a stoned character to normal flesh and bone.
Success depends  on the  strength of  the stone  relative to  the
power level of the spell.



Mental Spells


Mental Attack    
Cost: 3
Caster: PSI
Affects: 1 Creature
An invading pressure of thought swirling the creature's brain and
causing 1-7  hit points  of mental  damage per  power  level  and
potential insanity.

Sleep
Cost: 3
Caster: MAG, ALC, PSI
Affects: 3 Creatures plus power level
Causes creatures  to fall asleep and prevents them from attacking
the party  members or  defending themselves from attack.  Success
and duration  depends of  the power  of the creatures relative to
the power level of the spell.

Bless
Cost: 4
Caster: PRI, PSI
Affects: Party
Magically lowers  the party's  armor  class  and  enhances  their
chances to  hit a  creature relative  to the  power level  of the
spell.

Charm
Cost: 5
Caster: PRI, ALC, PSI
Affects: 1 Creature or NPC
Attempts to  charm a  creature to  prevent it  from attacking the
party.   Any creature  charmed will  also be easier to hit.  When
cast in non-combat situations, the spell attempts to charm an NPC
so that  it will  regard the  party in  a friendly  or  at  least
neutral manner for the duration of the encounter.  The higher the
power level, the better the charm.

Cure Lesser Cnd.
Cost: 4
Caster: PRI, ALC, PSI         
Affects: 1 Character
Attempts to  cure a  character of  one of  the lesser conditions:
afraid, blindness, nausea and minor irritations.  Success depends
on the  strength of  the malady  relative to  the strength of the
spell.

Divine Trap      
Cost: 4
Caster: PRI, PSI    
Affects: Treasure Chest
Permits the  inspector of  a  treasure  chest  to  determine  the
elements of the trap with great reliability by making the devices
attached more  readily apparent.   The  trap must,  of course, be
inspected after  Divine Trap  is cast for the spell to be useful.
Success of  the spell  depends on the power and complexity of the
trap relative to the spell's power.

Detect Secret
Cost: 5
Caster: MAG, PSI
Affects: Caster
Opens the caster's mind to anything that may be strange or out of
place and  allows him  or her  to detect  its presence within the
party's immediate  area.  The Detect Secret eye will "blink" when
the caster  detects something.  Duration and success of the spell
are relative to the spell's power level.

Identify
Cost: 8
Caster: PRI, PSI
Affects: 1 Creature or Item
Attempts to  reveal the  true name  of a  creature  or  an  item.
Success depends  on the power of the creature or the cloak of the
item relative to the power level of the spell.

Confusion        
Cost: 6
Caster: ALC, PSI
Affects: 1 Group
A blast of mental energy that attempts to scramble the creatures'
thinking causing  them to  run away,  attack themselves, cower in
fear, whip up a batch of fondue or otherwise act crazy.

Watchbells       
Cost: 5
Caster: MAG, PSI
Affects: Party
A psychic  bell cast in an attempt to wake other party members if
they are  asleep  or  unconscious  when  attacked  by  creatures.
Success depends  on the  length of  time the party has slept, how
tired the party members are and how solidly they sleep.

Hold Monsters    
Cost: 6
Caster: PRI, PSI
Affects: 3 Creatures plus power level   Attempts to confuse the
creatures into believing they are paralyzed.  Success depends on
the power of the creature relative to the power level of the
spell.

Mindread         
Cost: 8
Caster: PSI
Affects: Caster
Attempts to  discern what's on an NPC's mind.  Success depends on
the intelligence of the NPC relative to the spell's power level.

Sane Mind
Cost: 10
Caster: PRI, PSI
Affects: 1 Character
Attempts to  restore sanity  to an  insane  character.    Success
depends on how nuts the character is versus the spell's strength.

Psionic Blast
Cost: 8
Caster: PSI
Affects: 3 Creatures plus power level
An extreme  and powerful jolt of mental energy that scrambles the
creatures brains  and causes  1-7 hit points of mental damage per
power level and may cause insanity.

Illusion
Cost: 10
Caster: PSI
Affects: Party
Attempts to  conjure an  illusion of  a being so real that it can
attack creatures and can be attacked back!  The creatures' amount
and powers depend on the spell's power level.

Wizard's Eye
Cost: 10
Caster: MAG, PSI 
Affects: Caster
Allows the  caster to  see the  surrounding area from an overhead
view.   The size and detail of the area seen depends on the power
level of the spell.

Spooks           
Cost: 7
Caster: MAG, PSI    
Affects: All Creatures
Conjures an illusion that is so terrifying it may scare creatures
away, causing  them to  cower in fear or otherwise reducing their
capacity to fight well.

Death            
Cost: 10
Caster: PRI, PSI    
Affects: 1 Creature
Attempts to  kill a  creature outright.   Success  depends on the
creature's power relative to the spell's power.

Locate Object
Cost: 8
Caster: PRI, PSI    
Affects: Caster
Allows the  caster to magically determine the location of certain
buried or  hidden items,  Success depends  on the item's location
relative to  the caster, how well the item in question is hidden,
and the spell's power level.

Mind Flay        
Cost: 18
Caster: PSI
Affects: All Creatures
A concentrated tide of mental energy that conjures every fear and
devastates the creatures doing 4-16 points damage per power level
plus potential insanity.

Find Person      
Cost: 16
Caster: PRI, PSI    
Affects: Caster
Tries to  locate someone  you're looking  for, and may reveal all
parties within  a certain  range.  Success depends on the spell's
power level versus to the location and stealth of the one sought.



Divine Spells


Heal Wounds
Cost: 4
Caster: PRI, ALC, PSI
Affects: 1 Character
Heals 1-8  hit points  per power  level.  It will not cure lesser
conditions, such as blindness, or resurrect dead characters.

Make Wounds      
Cost: 3
Caster: PRI
Affects: 1 Creature
Invokes divine  powers to  cause bodily harm and inflicts 1-8 hit
points of damage per power level.

Magic Missile    
Cost: 4
Caster: MAG      
Affects: 1 Creature plus power level
Small, but  powerful, missiles  of magical  energy hurled  at  an
opponent doing 1-7 hit points of magic damage per power level.

Dispell Undead
Cost: 7
Caster: PRI
Affects: 1 Creature plus power level
Attempts to dispell an animated and undead creature.  The success
depends on  the creature's  power relative  to the  spell's power
level.

Enchanted Blade
Cost: 4
Caster: PRI
Affects:    Party
Magically enhances  members' weapons and increases the likelihood
of a  successful hit on a creature.  It also increases the chance
a hit  will penetrate  the creature's  armor.   The duration  and
power are relative to the spell's power level.
                                                                 
Blink
Cost: 7
Caster: MAG, PSI
Affects:   Caster
Allows the  caster to  disappear for  a brief time during combat,
blinking out  and in  sometime during each round.  He or she will
always reappear  to execute  normal combat options.  The duration
of the effect is relative to the spell's power level.

Magic Screen
Cost: 8
Caster: MAG
Affects: Party
Creates a magical barrier that attempts to protect the party from
all spells cast at them.  The strength of the barrier is relative
to the  power of  the creatures'  spells and  the  level  of  the
screen.

Conjuration      
Cost: 10
Caster: MAG, PRI
Affects: Party
Summons creatures  from the  ethereal planes  to  fight  for  the
party.  The power and number of creatures summoned is relative to
the power level of the spell.

Anti-Magic       
Cost: 7
Caster: MAG              
Affects: 1 Group
Forms a magical barrier around the creatures that may cause their
spells to  fizzle out  or backfire.   The  barrier's strength  is
relative to  the power  level of  the spells  cast and  the power
level of the Anti-Magic screen.

Remove Curse
Cost: 4
Caster: PRI
Affects: 1 Person
Attempts to  lift any  magically cursed  and stuck  items from  a
character.  Success depends on the strength of the curse relative
to the strength of the spell.

Healfull         
Cost: 12
Caster: PRI      
Affects: Party
A super-charged healing spell that attempts to restore hit points
and health to all members of the party.  The amount of hit points
restored is relative to the spell's power level.

Lifesteal
Cost: 12
Caster: PRI, PSI    
Affects: 1 Creature and Caster
Removes virtually  all lifeforce  from a creature and attempts to
channel some of it back into the caster to heal him or her.  Does
4-16 points  magic damage per power level multiplied by the power
level of the spell.

Astral Gate      
Cost: 8
Caster: MAG, PRI 
Affects: 1 Creature per power level
Attempts  to  banish  a  demon-type  creature  from  this  world.
Success depends  on the  power of  the creature  relative to  the
power of the spell.

Zap Undead       
Cost: 15
Caster: MAG         
Affects: 1 Creature
A tirade  of magical  power that tries to destroy one creature of
the undead variety with up to 1000 points of damage.

Recharge
Cost: 15
Caster: MAG, PRI 
Affects: Item    
Attempts to  restore a  magically enchanted  item's charges.  The
item must  be in  the castor's possession, and must have at least
one charge  left to  duplicate.  There is a chance the item could
be destroyed.   Success depends on the item's complexity relative
to the spell's power level.

Word of Death
Cost: 18
Caster: PRI
Affects: All Creatures
A divine word cast so powerfully it smashes the creatures with 4-
16 points of magical damage per power level.

Resurrection     
Cost: 20
Caster: MAG, PRI, PSI
Affects: 1 Character                                             
Tries to  revive a  dead  character.    Success  depends  on  the
character's lifeforce relative to the spell's power level.

Death Wish
Cost: 20
Caster: PRI
Affects: All Creatures
Attempts to  kill all  creatures outright  through sheer  magical
force.  Success depends on the power of the creatures relative to
the power level of the spell.

--------------------------------------------------------

RACES

Human
Resistances:  Although a Human has no natural resistances, it has
no particular shortcomings either.
STR 9, INT 8, PIE 8, VIT 9, DEX 9, SPD 8, PER 8
Humans are the race to which all others in Wizardry are compared.
Perfectly balanced in its statistics, having no particular
strengths and no decided weaknesses, the human serves as a stable
and dependable creature regardless of the profession a Human
character eventually enters.

Elf
Resistances:  Elves, because of their high intelligence, have a
nautral resistance to hypnosis and sleep spells.
STR 7, INT 10, PIE 10, VIT 7, DEX 9, SPD 9, PER 8
Elves are smallish creatures, with pointed ears and a broad
smile.  They exce;l at intellectual pursuits, loving not only
what they learn bu the study that comes with it as well.  Armed
with these smarts, Elves make excellent magic users.  Elves are
also nimble creatures, moving their small bodies with an above-
average ease and speed.

Dwarf
Resistances:  The Dwarves' robust body provides poison
resistance, while its heredity provides for magic spell
protection.
STR 11, INT 6, PIE 10, VIT 12, DEX 7, SPD 7, PER 7
Coming from a long line of forest and cave dwelling folk, Dwarfs
also have a taste for any adventure.  They are small beings, but
display a remarkable amount of strength.  Their hearty stance and
high vitality make them a natural for combat-related professions.
Also pious creatures, Dwarfs make great priests.

Gnomes
Resistances: Because of their high piety and ancestry, Gnomes
possess a resistance to magic spells.
STR 10, INT 7, PIE 13, VIT 10, DEX 8, SPD 6, PER 6
In the underground caves of Wizardry, one might just find whole
groups of Gnomes in their natural habitat.  Typically keeping to
themselves, Gnomes are sturdy, strong and agile creatures; their
small stance can easily fool opponents in comabt.  Gnomes are
also extremely pious individuals whose zest for learning is
virtually unequalled by any other race.

Hobbit
Resistances:  The Hobbit has resistance to Magic realm spells.
STR 8, INT 7, PIE 6, VIT 9, DEX 10, SPD 7, PER 13
A sleek and tiny race, the Hobbit is a dexterous and busy type
able to maneuver its body (and especially its fingers) into and
out of the tightest situations.  The Hobbit is also well known as
a charming conversationalist for its amazing friendliness and
hospitality.  Hobbits with lesser inclinations frequently use
their silver-tongues and quick fingers to help themselves to
goods and information.

Faerie
Resistances:  The Faerie's long kinship with nature provides
resistance to magic spells
STR 5, INT 11, PIE 6, VIT 6, DEX 10, SPD 14, PER 12
The tiniest and most agile race in all of Wizardry, Faeries are
delicate and beautiful beings.  Their small size and lightning
speed give them a naturally low armor class.  The Faerie is also
one of the smartest and friendliest creatures in Wizardry.
Although not much of a fighter, the Faerie can make an excellent
magic user or thief.


Lizardman
Resistances:  A lack of intelligence provides ressistance to
mental spell, while its skin resists acid.
STR 12, INT 5, PIE 5, VIT 14, DEX 8, SPD 10, PER 3
The Lizardman is a serpentine-type creature whose origins are
somewhat uncertain.  ALthough it is human-like in its ability to
talk and walk upright, the Lizardman is not intelligent or
personable (actually, others tend to avoid him).  Its strengths
lie in its natural ability to fight . . . and win.  Stong, fast
and hearty, with a mid that thinks, "kill, kill, kill," the
Lizardman can be the perfect combatant.

Dracon
Resistances:  Their dragon ancestry gives Dracons resistance to
acid and mental spells.
STR 10, INT 7, PIE 6, VIT 12, DEX 10, SPD 8, PER 6
A mixture of blood between the human and the dragon created this
wondrous race with incredibly unique abilities.  While remaining
private, the Dracon occasionally ventures out and will accompany
another group for reasons of its own.  It is strong, deterous,
and hearty, and can make a great Ranger, Thief or Fighter.  The
Dracon also has a limited ability to breathe acid upon its
opponents!

Rawulf
Resistances:  The Rawulf's thick hair provides grea cold
protection.
STR 8, INT 6, PIE 12, VIT 10, DEX 8, SPD 8, PER 10
Rawulf's are devoted and hearty creatures.  Descending from a
race of intelligent, bipedal canines, they share their ancestors'
caring personality and thick coat as well as an indication of
their speed, strength and dexterity.  The Rawulf's desire to
learn coupled with high piety also help it to become and
excellent Priest.

Felpurr
Resistances:  Quick reflexes help it to dodge missiles and
spells.
STR 7, INT 10, PIE 7, VIT 7, DEX 10, SPD 12, PER 10
Like their distant relative, the cat, Felpurrs are fast, smart
and personable.  They walk on their hind feet, and are beautiful
creatures with a full mane of hair covering their bodies.
Felpurrs are also intelligent and dexterous.  Throughout their
evolution, they have relied on their sleek body styling and speed
more than actual physical strength, and have the ability to move
their bodies with a grace unknown to virtually and other race.

Mook
Resistances:  The Mook's magical nature gives it resistance to
magical spells.  Its fur provides resistance to cold.
STR 10, INT 10, PIE 6, VIT 10, DEX 7, SPD 7, PER 9
Very magical in nature, the Mook's exact origins are entirely
unknown.  Those skilled in the Wizardry's mythology have gone so
far as to speculate the Mook may even be of alien origin!  Mooks
are extremely intelligent and strong creatures, and have a
personality sure to charm the likes of most they encounter.

Appendices



Appendix B:  Character Professions


A total  of fourteen traditional fields of study are available to
your character,  and each  of  these  professions  follows.    By
meeting the  minimum qualifications  of a  profession, characters
can begin to train in the profession's skills, magic and conduct.
Along with  a description  of the  profession, you  will see  its
spellbooks, primary skills and basic equipment.

-    Spellbooks:   If the  profession has  the ability  to  learn
magic, the spellbook will be listed here.  Further information on
magic and  the spellbook  itself is in the Magical spells section
of this manual.

-    Primary Skills:  Fresh out of training, your characters have
become  somewhat   proficient  in   certain  aspects   of   their
profession.  The primary skills reflect this training.

-    Basic Equipment:   It would be pretty unkind, not to mention
rude, to  send your  characters into  the  world  naked,  without
weapons or  shoes on their feet.  Listed here is your character's
basic, beginning inventory.


Fighter
Spellbooks:  None
Primary Skills:  None
Basic Equipment:   Long  Sword,  Leather  Cuirass,  fur  Legging,
Sandals, Buckler Shield.

STR 12

The general  warrior  class  is  one  of  the  most  time-honored
professions in  fantasy role-playing.   Fighters  generally  have
high hit points, and relish their role as shock-troops.  They may
specialize in  a wide  array of  weaponry skills,  and often  use
these talents  to dispose  of monsters  who stand  in the  way of
adventure.   Fighters mainly  concentrate on these combat skills,
honing them  to a  deadly point.   Fighters  can wear  almost all
armor and use most weapons.


Mage
Spellbooks:  Mage
Primary Skills:  Thaumaturgy
Basic Equipment:   Staff,  Robes (U), Robes (L), Sandals, 1 Magic
Missile Scroll.

INT 12

The creators  of the  powerful Mage spells continue, to this day,
to devote  a life's  work to  their study.  Because they practice
only the  Mage spells  and seek  no other  interests, Mages learn
them quicker  than any  other profession  in Wizardry.  They have
poor hit  points and  are very  limited in  the armor and weapons
they can  use.   However, their  powerful spellcasting makes them
ideal for any party.


Priest
Spellbooks:  Priest
Primary Skills:  Theology
Basic Equipment:   Quarterstaff, Robes (U), Robes (L), Sandals, 3
Lt. Heal potions.

PIE 12, PER 8

Long known  for their  healing powers,  Priests are useful to any
party hoping  to live  for more  than  a  day  in  Lost  Guardia.
Dedicated individuals, Priests give all of their attention to the
study of  divine Priest  spells.   Their devotion  allows them to
learn Priest  spells quicker  than any other profession.  Priests
are also skilled diplomats, able to negotiate with NPCs.  Priests
have fairly  high hit  points,  must  use  specially  consecrated
weapons, and can wear light armor.


Thief
Spellbooks:  None
Primary Skills:  Skulduggery
Basic Equipment:   Cutlass,  Cloth Shirt, Cloth Pants, Buskins, 6
Bite Daggers.

DEX 12, SPD 8

For those  who just  couldn't resist  a good temptation, thieving
might just  be the  perfect career.   Thieves  are very  good  as
circumventing the  noxious treasure  chest traps  which often lie
between aparty  and their  hard-earned loot.   They also have the
skill to  pick locked  doors, and delight in the opportunities to
pickpocket.   Thieves can  hide in  combat, and  if  successfully
hidden, they can launch a surprise attack... doing double damage.


Ranger
Spellbooks:  Alchemist
Primary Skills:  Scout, bow
Basic Equipment:   Short  Bow, 100  Willow Arrows, Suede Doublet,
Suede Pants, Buskins.

STR 10, INT 8, PIE 8, Vit 11, DEX 10, SPD 8, PER 8

The nature-lover  of Wizardry,  the Ranger  enjoys a  talent  for
scouting out  such things  as secret  passages, trick  walls  and
other traps  of this  nature.  Much like Robin Hood, a classic of
this profession,  Rangers are excellent archers and have a deadly
accurate aim.   They  receive a  bonus when  using all projectile
weapons including  a chance  to score a critical hit.  Around the
third  level   of  experience,  Rangers  slowly  begin  to  learn
Alchemists' spells.   They  also have fairly high hit points, and
can hide during combat.



Alchemists
Spellbooks:  Alchemist
Primary Skills:  Archemy
Basic Equipment:   Staff, Robes (U), Robes (L), Sandals, 1 Cherry
Bomb potion.

INT 13, DEX 13

The weavers of magical spells, Alchemists aspire to bend the laws
of  the   universe.     Although  they  are  spellcasters,  their
traditions show  them to  be  the  mixers  of  potions,  and  the
diviners of  spells.   Using their  high intelligence, Alchemists
concentrate their  studies fully  to this  art allowing  them  to
learn its  spells faster  than any  other profession in Wizardry.
Additionally, due  to the  nature of  their spells,  they need no
oratory and cannot be silenced.



Bard
Spellbooks:  Mage
Primary Skills:  Music
Basic Equipment:   Sling,  Bullet Stone  (25), Cloth Shirt, Cloth
Pants, Poets's Lute.

INT 10, DEX 12, SPD 8, PER 12

The silver-tongued adventurer, the Bard enjoys a talent for song,
entertainment and  conversation.    Additionally,  their  musical
talents allow  them to  play the  different enchanted instruments
found within  Wizardry, casting  a spell  with each.   Bards also
begin to  study powerful  Mage spells  around the  third level of
experience.   Bards have  been known  to pick  a pocket or two as
well, and  learnin the  ways of the thief, allowing them to  pick
locks, disarm traps and hide during combat.



Psionic
Spellbooks:  Psionic
Primary Skills:  Theosophy
Basic Equipment:   Dagger,  Robes (U), Robes (L), Sandals, Shadow
Cloak

STR 10, INT 14, VIT 14, PER 10

Concentrating on  the wonders of the mind, the Psionic is a magic
user who  has  developed  mental  powers  to  a  level  no  other
profession can hope to possess.  Their spells have the ability to
alter the  mind, read  it and  mess with it in general.  They are
both clairvoyants and divinators, who focus all their energies on
their mental  and magical  abilities.    Through  this  devotion,
Psionics  learn   the  mental   spells  faster   than  any  other
profession.



Valkyrie
Spellbooks:  Priest
Primary Skills:  Pole & Staff
Basic Equipment:   Spear,  Fur Halter,  Chamois  Skirt,  Sandals,
Leather Helm

STR 10, PIE 11, VIT 11, DEX 10, SPD 11, PER 8

A profession  open only  to female  characters, the Valkyrie is a
fiest-rate lance  warrior.   Her knowledge of weapons is vast and
precise; her  spirit for combat is great.  She is strong, and has
the ability  to swing her sword with a speed and accuracy admired
by all.   Around  the third  level of ability, the pious Valkyrie
begins the  study of  Priest spells,  although she  doesn't learn
them as quickly as the Priest.



Bishop
Spellbooks:  Priest, Mage
Primary Skills:  Theology, Thaumaturgy
Basic Equipment:   Quarterstaff,  Robes (U),  Robes (L), Sandals,
Mitre

INT 15, PIE 15, PER 8

Extremely intelligent  and pious  individuals, Bishops  devote  a
major portion  of their time to the ancient studies.  Pooling the
knowledge of  the  Mage  and  Priest,  Bishops  are  well-studied
characters who  learn the  spells  of  both  their  counterparts.
However, because  of the  time required to study both spellbooks,
Bishops learn  spells  more  slowly  than  the  Mage  or  Priest.
Bishops, because  of their  great  wisdom,  are  skilled  in  the
political art of diplomacy.



Lord
Spellbooks:  Priest
Primary Skills:  Diplomacy
Basic  Equipment:     Broadsword,  Quilt  Tunic,  Quilt  Legging,
Buskins, Steel Helm

STR 12, INT 9, PIE 12, VIT 12, DEX 9, SPD 9, PER 14

Both an  excellent fighter, diplomat and pious spellcaster, Lords
are the  true crusader  knights in  Wizardry.  While their combat
skills are  their primary  concern, the  Lord's interest  in  the
divine  Priest   spells  develops   around  the  third  level  of
experience, and  helps to  provide the  party with the additional
healing power it may need.  Whether it be inflicing the damage or
healing it  or negotiating  it, Lords are a great addition to any
party.



Samurai
Spellbooks:  Mage
Primary Skills:  Sword
Basic Equipment:    Katana,  Wakazashi,  Robes  (U),  Robes  (L),
Sandals

STR 12, INT 11, VIt 9, DEX 12, SPD 14, PER 8

The true  swordsman of Wizardry, the Samurai has dedicated his or
her life  to the  study of  the sword.   Their  lightening  speed
combined with their sword's accuracy help them to fight their way
through most  any situation.   Samuari can learn the deadly skill
of the  critical kill,  unleashing it upon their opponents in the
heat of  battle.  Their mystical side allows them to develop mage
spells around the third level of experience.



Monk
Spellbooks:  Psionic
Primary Skills:  Hand & Feet, Theosophy
Basic Equipment:  Bo, 15 Shurikens, Robes (U), Robes (L), Sandals

STR 13, INT 8, PIE 13, DEX 10, SPD 13, PER 8

A wandering  person in search of inner and outer development, the
Monk is  a talented  warrior, fighting  most with  the hands  and
feet, who  tops this  ability with  a knowledge  of self defense.
The Monk  also possesses  keen insight into the ways of the mind,
and begins  to learn  the Psionic  spells at  the third  level of
experience.   The Monk  is also  studied in  the  body,  and  may
critically hit an opponent.  He or she may also hide in combat.



Ninja
Spellbooks:  Alchemist
Primary Skills:  Hand & Feet, Ninjutsu
Basic Equipment:  15 Shurikens, Ninja Cowl, Ninja Garb (U), Ninja
Garb (L), Tabi Boots

STR 12, INT 10, PIE 10, VIT 12, DEX 12, SPD 12

The ultimate  assassin, the  Ninja is  a silent and devout killer
with skills  and talents  admired, but know little about, by all.
They commonly  fight with  their hands  and feet,  wreaking havoc
upon their  unlucky opponents.  Ninja may also deliver a critical
blow ot  whatever stands  in their  way.   Sharing  some  of  the
Thief's skills,  the Ninja is able to hide in combat, in hopes of
launching a deadly surprise attack.  Much later in their careers,
Ninja begin to learn Alchemist spells.

Appendix C:  Character Skills


As your  characters travel through forests and encounter NPCs and
monsters, they  will develop,  learn and hone the skills that are
necessary for  survival and  success in Wizardry.  There are four
categories of skills:  Weaponry, Physical, Academia and Personal.
Within each  of  these  categories,  there  are  many  individual
skills, all  of which  are listed  in this section.  Depending on
your character's profession, you may not see every possible skill
while reviewing your character


                         Weaponry Skills
                                
In general,  Weaponry skills  affect  a  character's  ability  to
handle his  or her  weapon.   As your  character practices  these
skills (equipping  and using a weapon in combat, blocking a blow,
etc.), points  will  be  added  to  the  skill  to  reflect  your
training.   At their  best, all  skills reach  a maximum  of  100
points.

WAND &  DAGGER:   The talent of wielding daggers, wands and other
small items used as weapons in combat.
SWORD:   Any sword,  including the  katana, used  as a  weapon in
combat is covered under this skill.
AXE:   This ability  covers any  axe, such  as the battle or hand
axe, used as a weapon in combat.
MACE &  FLAIL:   The talent  needed to  use any  mace-like  item,
including the flail or hammer, as a weapon in combat.
POLE &  STAFF:   The mastery  of any  pole &  staff, such  as the
halberd, bo or staff, used as a weapon in combat.
THROW:   The demonstrated ability to be on target when any weapon
is thrown.   This  includes  such  things  as  shurikens,  darts,
potions and weapons that are thrown accidently.
SLING:  The ability to use any weapon which consists of a leather
strap and  two cords  which, when  whirled  and  released,  hurls
stones and other like objects at an opponent.
BOW:   The flair  of handling  any bow  which fires arrows and is
used as a weapon in combat.
SHIELD:   The art  of using  a shield  effectively  to  block  an
opponents blow while fighting or parrying.
HANDS & FEET:  The talent of using one's hands and feet as lethal
weapons to strike and hopefully kill and opponent.


                         Physical Skills
                                
Physical skills  generally affect  a character's  ability  to  do
things which require talents of the body or voice.  For instance,
a character  skilled in  Scout will  keenly perceive  a piece  of
straw that looks out of place in a giant hay pile.  The unskilled
scouting character, on the other hand, will blindly walk down the
hall, oblivious  to the  giant red  sign that  says, "Secret Door
Here!"   As with  most skills,  Physical skills  grow stronger as
your characters  practice them.   Physical skills reach a maximum
of 100 points

SCOUT:   The knack  of seeing  and finding  things such as secret
doors, hidden  entrances or  buried items others seem to pass by.
You  must  add  points  manually  to  "Scout"  to  increase  your
character's proficiency.
MUSIC:   The art  of playing  enchanted musical  instruments  and
bringing forth from them different magical spells.
ORATORY:   The vocal  discipline required  to properly  recite  a
magical spell  in combat.  Without good oratory, spells meant for
monsters may fizzle or backfire on the party.
LEGERDEMAIN:   The ability  to pickpocket  (steal) items  or gold
from NPCs without their knowledge or permission.
SKULDUGGERY:   The delicate  skill of  inspecting  and  disarming
traps on chests and picking locks on doors.
NINJUTSU:   The legendary  art that  allows  characters  to  hide
themselves from  their  opponents.    For  the  Ninja  and  Monk,
proficiency in Ninjutsu helps to lower their armor class rating.
SWIMMING:   A measurement  of your  character's ability  to  swim
across deep  water.   Characters with  fewer than 10 skill points
may drown from entering deep water.
CLIMBING:   The knack  of taking  falls, climbing  into pits, and
scaling the sides of walls without taking damage.


                         Academia Skills
                                
Academia  skills  affect  a  character's  ability  to  learn  and
understand matters  intellectual.   These skills  also affect the
magic users'  ability to  learn and  understand  spells.    While
Academia skills  may eventually  increase automatically,  magical
study skills  must be  advanced manually  be adding  skill points
whenever a character gains a level; these are studied skills, not
practiced.   Without study,  the magician will never learn spells
beyond the  basic.   As with all the skills, the highest amount a
particular skill can reach is 100 points.

ARTIFACTS: The  ability to  effectively use  and  invoke  magical
items depends  on this skill. Without a developed Artifact skill,
there is a chance the item's power will fizzle or backfire.  This
skill also affects a character's ability to successfully assay an
item to determine its intricacies.
MYTHOLOGY:   The ability  to recognize, while in combat, the true
identities of monsters.
SCRIBE:   The ability to successfully invoke the magical power of
a scroll during combat.
ALCHEMY:     The  art  of  learning,  practicing  and  exercising
Alchemist spells.
THEOLOGY:   The pursuit  of the  divine interests  leading to the
study of Priest spells.
THEOSOPHY:   The possession  of mental and spiritual insight that
allows its possessor to study Psionic spells.
THAUMATURGY:   The path  of study  followed by the Mage and those
who follow him to learn Mage spells.
KIRIJUTSU:   The deadly  skill and  knowledge of  the body  which
allows its  possessor to  strike a  vital blow  or critical area,
hopefully killing an opponent with a single blow.
MAPPING:   The ability  to transcribe  an accurate  record of the
party's adventure.  The higher  the skill, the more detail (door,
stairs, trees,  gates, etc.)  included.   This skill  requires  a
mapping kit to be effective.
DIPLOMACY:   The art  of negotiation and creation of mutual pacts
and trust  between the  party and  another  group.    Allows  the
negotiator to truce well and form alliances with NPCs.


                         Personal Skills

Lost Guardia is a world unlike any your characters have ever
known.  Although they come prepared with a great selection of
skills, there are still some things they might pick up along the
way.

FIREARMS:  The use of small firearms, like muskets.  This skill
determines your character's ability to load and accurately fire
such a weapon.
REFLEXTION:  The ability to take small jumps so quickly - faster
than the eye - that a double image is created.  This skill's most
effective use is in a character's ability to avoid an attack.
The "after image" is usually the target.
SNAKE SPEED:  Allows characters to move with lightning reflexes,
increasing speed in all aspects where it is a factor.
EAGLE EYE:  The ability to target a creature with a weapon or
spell and strike with an amazing degree of accuracy.
POWER STRIKE:  An ability to strike a blow that does maximum
damage - and sometimes yields more than that!
MIND CONTROL:  Those adept in this skill can master control of
their own minds.  This extra willpower helps them to fend off
sleep or Psionic spells and to retain control of their own mind.

     
     
     Appendix D:  Customer Support
     
                    In United States & Canada
                                   
           See inside front cover for support phone
                 numbers and hours of operation
                                     
                                     
                   We Appreciate Your Comments
                                     
 As you play Crusaders of the Dark Savant and read its manual,
 you may  think of  ways we  can improve our products.  If you
 do, we  want to hear from you.  It's no secret that we're out
 to beat  the fur  leggings off other computer games, and with
 your help and ideas we can.  Send your comments, compliments,
 criticisms and suggestions to:
 
                      Product Development
                    Sir-tech Software, Inc.
              P.O. Box 245, Ogdensburg, NY 13669
                                
                                
           Technical Support - Available 5 days/week
                                
 If your  game isn't  working as  you would expect it to, feel
 free  to   call  us   at  (315)  393-6644  (no  game  hints).
 Technical Support  lines are  open Monday  through Friday,  9
 a.m. to 5 p.m. (except holidays). You may also write to us.
 
                       Technical Support
                    Sir-tech Software, Inc.
             Ogdensburg Business Center, Suite 2E
                     Ogdensburg, NY 13669
                                
 When you call or write, please have ready your computer make,
 amount of  RAM and  extended memory.    Additionally,  please
 inform us  if your computer has any special start-up programs
 or memory resident programs.
     
     
                     Contacting the Hotline
                                   
 Getting a busy signal when you dial us?  When a game is first
 released, that's  not uncommon - lots of people are trying to
 get through.   You  may call  (315) 393-6633 during the hours
 printed on  the inside front cover of the manual, or write to
 us. We have someone waiting to answer your letter.
 
                         Hints Hotline
                    Sir-tech Software, Inc.
               P.O. Box 245, Ogdensburg, NY 13669
                                 
 
                 In the United States & Canada
 
 
                            Repairs
  
  If  your  disk  has  become  unreadable  within  30  days  of
  purchase, return  it with  a dated,  original receipt to Sir-
  tech Software,  Inc. for  a free replacement.  After 30 days,
  enclose  $10.00  to  cover  costs  of  media  restoration  or
  replacement and  $2.50 to  cover shipping  and handling.  (NY
  residents, please  add 7%  sales tax  to total  of repair and
  shipping).   Prices are  subject to  change  without  notice.
  Please include  the following  information in  your  package.
  Failure to do so could delay  processing time:
     
  ù                    Original, master diskettes
  ù                    Warranty card (if not already sent        
     to Sir-tech)
  ù                    Letter explaining problem and             
     computer configuration
                       For free replacements within 30           
     days, original bill of sale (will       be   returned   to
     you)
  ù                    For replacements after 30 days,           
     $10.00 repair charge plus $2.50         shipping       and
     handling fee (plus tax   if any)
     
     
                             Updates
                                   
           Please call ahead to determine availability
  Product updates  from Sir-tech  are available  for $15.00 for
  media and $2.50 to cover shipping and handling (NY residents,
  please add  7% sales  tax to  total of  repair and shipping).
  Prices are  subject to change without notice.  Please include
  the following  in your package.  Failure to do so could delay
  processing time:
  
  ù  Original, master diskettes
  ù  Warranty card (if not already sent to Sir-tech)
  ù  $15.00 update  plus $2.50  shipping  and  handling  fee
     (plus tax if applicable)
  ù  Letter  requesting   the  update   including   computer
     configuration required
     
     
                      For the Best Service
                                   
  Please return your warranty registration card.  Doing so will
  guarantee you the fastest possible repair or replacement of a
  damaged diskette.  It also entitles you to be notified of new
  Sir-tech products as they are released.
                                                                 


Appendix E:  Hints & Tips
                                
1.   Where's the  Start New  Game option?  Before you can start a
new game, you need to create a party in the Character Menu.  Once
you have created six characters, return to the Main Menu.  There,
use the  Add Member  option.   Once you  have added  at least one
character to the party, the Start New Game option will appear.
2.   To new  Wizardry players, Dracons and Bards  are valuable in
combat (they're  good for  experienced players, too).  A Dracon's
breath attack  is highly consistent, and typically scores  damage
to opponents.   By  creating a  Dracon magic  user or  thief, the
character will  not become  "inactive" in  the middle of combat -
after casting spells, the Dracon may have enough stamina left for
a breath  attack.   The Bard,  on the  other   hand,  carries  an
instrument that  provides endless Sleep spells!  Needless to say,
such an item makes combat much easier.
3.   Diplomacy is  everything.   Well, almost.   When you meet up
with a group of NPCs, cast a Charm spell, if you have one.  Then,
try negotiations.  The better a character's diplomacy, the better
negotiations may go.  Additionally, remember that it might not be
in your best interest to talk with every NPC in the village.   If
word gets back to your other friends, why, what would they think?
4.   Be careful  who you  expose yourself  to.  When you offer to
trade Lore  with another  party by selecting the Lore option, you
may learn all they know about the area and their quest.  However,
you tell them everything you know in return!
5.   Good notes  are important as extra insurance.  You can refer
to them  to see  if you've  missed something or to recall certain
information you might need.
6.   If you're  relatively safe  in an  encounter,  let  as  many
characters as possible rest to regain some stamina.
7.   Spells that  incapacitate monsters (such as Sleep) are great
to use.   While  the monsters  are sleeping,  you can  rest  your
characters up,  too.   Also, you'll  get some  great swings in on
them.
8.   Some places  on Lost Guardia seem safer to rest than others.
Monsters are more likely to find your party if they're camped out
in the center of a great hall versus a small, enclosed room.
9.   Avoid  killing  NPCs  until  you're  sure  they  don't  have
something you need.  Once you kill and NPC, he or she is gone for
good.
10.  When you encounter a new monster, don't hold back, and don't
assume it's  easy to kill.  Later, when you know what spells work
on it and what it can do to you, you can relax a little.
11.  Be thorough.  Read messages carefully.  You never know where
you might be able to find or use something.
12.   If you're dealing with more than one group, you may want to
kill off  groups with  single monsters  first.   In this way, the
tough monsters  with lots of spells can't retreat to the rear out
of your  fighters' range.  Sometimes, however, the reverse may be
desirable.
13.   Have fun.   Even  when the  going gets  tough, and you feel
hopelessly stuck.   There  is a  way out.   Check  all the  walls
around you.   Remember  messages you've read or check your notes.
Or call  us Monday  to Friday,  4 p.m. to 8 p.m. and weekends, 12
noon to 6 p.m.  We'll get you out.
   
   
   
            The Ultimate in Hints, Tips and Information
            for the seasoned or the new Wizardry player.
                                   
                    Crusaders of the Dark Savant
                      Playmaster's Compendium
                                   
       Everything you ever wanted to know about Crusaders of
      the Dark Savant is discussed.  You'll find strategies to
             help you create the definative party plus:
                                   
                              ù  Maps
                      ù  Monster  & Item Stats
                  ù  Interview with David Bradley
                    ù  Interviews with all NPCs!
                              & more!
                                   
                               $19.95
                                   
                  Call  (315) 393-6633 to order or
                     Visit your local retailer!
              (price subject to change without notice)
   

     
     
     
                           Disclaimer
     
     Neither  Sir-tech   Software,  Inc.,   the   author(s),
     distributor(s) or  seller(s) of this product shall have
     any liability or responsibility to the purchaser or any
     other person  or entity  with respect to any liability,
     loss or  damage caused or alleged to be caused directly
     or  indirectly  by  this  product,  including  but  not
     limited  to   any  interruption  of  service,  loss  of
     business  and  anticipatory  profits  or  consequential
     damages resulting  from the  use or  operation of  this
     product. This product will be exchanged if defective in
     the manufacture,  labeling or packaging, but except for
     such replacement  the sale  or subsequent  use of  this
     program material is without warranty or liability.
     
     Note:   This product  is copyrighted and all rights are
     reserved.   The distribution  and sale  of this product
     are intended for personal use of the original purchaser
     only, and  for  use  only  on  the  computer  system(s)
     specified herein.  Renting this product, or duplicating
     and selling  or renting  or otherwise distributing this
     product, in any form, is hereby expressly prohibited.
     
     
     
     
     
     


